5
1
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

0
1

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
2
3
0

.

6
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

gplsiua: combining temporal information and id96 for

cross-document event ordering

borja navarro-colorado and estela saquete

natural language processing group

university of alicante

alicante, spain

borja@dlsi.ua.es, stela@dlsi.ua.es

abstract

building uni   ed timelines from a collection of
written news articles requires cross-document
event coreference resolution and temporal re-
lation extraction. in this paper we present an
approach event coreference resolution accord-
ing to: a) similar temporal information, and
b) similar semantic arguments. temporal in-
formation is detected using an automatic tem-
poral information system (tipsem), while se-
mantic information is represented by means
of lda id96. the evaluation of
our approach shows that it obtains the highest
micro-average f-score results in the semeval-
2015 task 4:    timeline: cross-document
event ordering    (25.36% for trackb, 23.15%
for subtrackb), with an improvement of up to
6% in comparison to the other systems. how-
ever, our experiment also showed some draw-
backs in the id96 approach that de-
grades performance of the system.

1 introduction

since access to knowledge is crucial in any domain,
connecting and time-ordering the information ex-
tracted from different documents is a very important
task. the goal of this paper is therefore to build or-
dered timelines for a set of events related to a tar-
get entity. in doing so, our approach is dealing with
two problems: a) cross-document event coreference
resolution and b) cross-document temporal relation
extraction.

in order to arrange event mentions in a timeline it
is necessary to know which event mentions co-refer

to the same event or fact and occur at the same mo-
ment. our approach attempts to formalize the idea
that two or more event mentions co-refer if they have
not only temporal compatibility (the events occur at
the same time) but also semantic compatibility (the
event mentions refers to the same facts, location, en-
tities, etc.).

of a set of event mentions in one or more texts,
our proposal groups together the event mentions that
(i) have the same or a similar temporal reference,
(ii) have the same or a similar event head word, and
(iii) whose main arguments refer to the same or sim-
ilar topics. in order to evaluate the system, we have
participated in the semeval-2015 task 4    timeline:
cross-document event ordering   .

in the following sections we will present the the-
oretical background to our approach (section 2) and
the main technical aspects (sections 3 and 4). then
we will present the results obtained (section 5) and
some conclusions.

2 background

two or more event mentions co-refer when they re-
fer to the same real fact or event. two events can
denote the same fact whereas the linguistic mentions
have a different syntax structure, different words, or
even a different meaning. whatever the case may be,
both event mentions must be semantically related.

an event mention is formed of an event head
(usually a verb or a deverbal noun) that
is re-
lated to a semantic structure (linguistically rep-
resented as an argument structure with an agent,
instrument, etc.,
patient,
theme,
the se-
mantic roles)
in which there are some event

that is,

participants (entities) and which is located in
place and time (levin and rappaport-hovav, 2005;
hovav et al., 2010). the meaning of an event men-
tion is therefore not only the meaning of the event
head, but also the compositional meaning of all the
components and their relations: head, participants,
time, place, etc.

in order to detect this semantic relation between
event mentions, previous papers have isolated the
main components of the event structure. for in-
stance, cybulska and vossen (2013) apply an event
model based on four components:
location, time,
participant and action. moreover, with regard to
temporal information, only explicit temporal ex-
pressions that appears in the text are considered,
but no temporal information is inferred by navigat-
ing temporal links. bejan and harabagiu (2014)
use a rich set of linguistic features to model the
event structure, including lexical features such as
head word and lemmas, class features such as pos
or event class, semantic features such as id138
sense or semantic roles frames, etc. they use an
unsupervised approach based on a non-parametrical
bayesian model.

3 our approach

in our approach we represent each event mention
as a head word (the event
tag in the timeml
(saur     et al., 2006) annotation scheme) related to a
temporal expression (implicit or explicit), a set of
entities (0 or more), and a set of topics that repre-
sents what the event mention is referring to. this
paper is focused on temporal information process-
ing and topic-based semantic representation.

3.1 temporal information processing

the timeml (saur     et al., 2006) annotation scheme
has now been adopted as a standard by a large
number of researchers in the    eld of temporal
information annotation.
it represents not only
events and temporal expressions, but also links
(pustejovsky et al., 2003)

a manual annotation of event mentions and the
dct of texts have been considered as an input of
the system, and an automatic system has been used
to perform the annotation with temporal expres-
sions and temporal links in order to be able to es-

if
tablish a complete timeline of the input texts.
a plain text is considered, systems such tipsem
(temporal information processing using semantics)
(llorens et al., 2013; llorens et al., 2012)1 are able
to automatically annotate all the temporal expres-
sions (timex3), events (event) and links be-
tween them.

once the temporal links have been established, all
the speci   c temporal information for each event is
inferred by means of temporal links navigation. this
information allows us to determine temporal com-
patibility between all the events considered.

3.2 topic-based semantic representation

the meaning of each event structure has been rep-
resented by using id96 (blei, 2012) on
a reference corpus.
id96 is a fam-
ily of algorithms that automatically discover topics
from a collection of documents. more speci   cally,
we apply the id44 (lda)
(blei et al., 2003), which follows a bottom up ap-
proach. each word is assigned to a topic according
to the co-ocurrence words in the context (document)
and the topics assigned to this word in other docu-
ments. in formal terms, a topic is a distribution on
a    xed vocabulary. we have applied the lda to the
wikinews corpus.2 each topic in this corpus is rep-
resented using the twenty most prominent words.

4 architecture of the system

our approach to build timelines from written news
in english implies event coreference resolution by
applying three cluster processes in sequential order:
a temporal cluster, a lemma cluster, and a topic clus-
ter. it combines various resources:

    id39, using opener web

services.3

    timeml automatic annotation of texts using

tipsem system (llorens et al., 2010).

    the nltk4 verb lemmatizer based on word-

net (fellbaum, 1998).

    the senna (collobert et al., 2011) semantic

roles labeling.

1http://gplsi.dlsi.ua.es/demos/timee/
2https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwikinews/
3http://www.opener-project.eu/webservices/
4http://www.nltk.org/

    the lda id96 algorithm, using

mallet (mccallum, 2002).

4.1 target entity filtering
if the target entity    ltering is to be performed then it
is    rst necessary to resolve the named entity recog-
nition and coreference resolution. this is done by
integrating the external opener web services into
our proposal. more speci   cally, the components
applied in our proposal are the ner component,5
which identi   es the names of people, cities, and mu-
seums, and classi   es them in a semantic class (per-
son, location, etc.) and the coreference resolu-
tion component,6 whose objective is to identify all
those words that refers to the same object or entity.
only those events that are part of sentences con-
taining the target entity or a coreference entity of the
target will be selected for the    nal timeline.

4.2 temporal id91 approach
a plain text was considered and we use the tipsem
system to automatically annotate all the temporal
expressions (timex3), events (event) and links
between them. the tlinks annotated in the text
are used in order to extract the time context of
each event and make it possible to infer both time
at which each event occurs and the temporal or-
dering between the events in the text. moreover,
if we are able to determine the time of the event,
we will be able to determine temporal compatibil-
ity between events, even when they are contained
in different documents, thus signifying that cross-
document event coreference resolution is also possi-
ble.

in this    rst step, all the events from the differ-
ent documents that occurring on the same date will
therefore be part of the same cluster. the clusters are
positioned in ascending ordered based on the date
assigned.

4.3 semantic id91 based on lemmas
once all the events that share temporal information
and the target entity have been grouped together, we
apply a simple id91 based on head word lem-
mas. this lemma-based id91 groups together
all event mentions with the same head word lemma,

5http://opener.olery.com/ner
6http://opener.olery.com/coreference

the same temporal information and the same target
entity. we therefore assume that all these event men-
tions corefer to the same event. this is our run 1 at
the competition.

4.4 semantic id91 based on topics

the problem of the lemma-based cluster is that it
does not take into account the argument structure of
the event. this last id91 therefore attempts to
solve this problem by extracting the semantic roles
from each event and representing their meaning by
using topics on a reference corpus. this approach
has three steps:

1. using senna (collobert et al., 2011) as se-
mantic roles labeling, we have detected roles
a0 and a1.7 which are related to the event
mention head word. for each role we extract
only the nouns.

2. we have extracted 500 topics from wikinews
using id96 with mallet. all
these topics are used as a knowledge base. we
will use only the most representative words for
each topic (the twenty words with the greatest
weight) and the weights that they have in each
topic.

3. finally, we have created an event-topic matrix.
each event (raws) is represented by a vector.
the values of the vector are the addition of
weights of each argument noun in each topic
(columns).

for example, if the nouns in arguments a0 and
a1 are    users, problems, phones   , we represent their
meanings according to the topics tn assigned to them
by applying lda to wikinews (user = t0, t3, t5,
problems = t0, t2, phones = t5, t6, etc). then,
the event e of this sentence is represented by a n-
dimensional vector in which n is the amount of
topics (500) and whoses values are the addition of
weight of each noun in each topic tn.

in order to group together similar event mentions,
we have applied a id116 id91 algorithm to
these event vectors.8 the distance metric used has

7in

to

order

represent semantic roles,

senna
uses the tag set proposed by proposition bank project
(http://verbs.colorado.edu/  mpalmer/projects/ace.html)
a0 and a1 represent the main roles related to each verb.

8note that it has been applied only to the events previously

clustered following the lema-based approach (run 1).

been euclidean distance. the number of cluster
has been adjusted to two.9 therefore, each cluster
with the same head word lemma, the same tempo-
ral information and the same target entity is then re-
clustered according to the similarity of the main top-
ics of its arguments. this cluster corresponds to our
run 2 at the competition.

5 evaluation results

semeval-2015 task 4 consists on building timelines
from written news in english in which a target entity
is involved. the input data provided by the organiz-
ers is therefore a set of documents and a set of target
entities related to those documents. two different
tracks are proposed in the task, along with their sub-
tracks:

    track a: this consists of using raw texts as in-
put and obtaining full timelines. subtrack a
has the same input data, but the output will be
the timelines of only ordered events (no as-
signment of time anchors).

    track b: this consists of using texts with man-
ual annotation of events mentions as input data.
subtrack b has the same input data but the out-
put will be timelines of only ordered events.

in the semeval-2015 task 4 competition we have
participated in track b and subtrack b. the results
for the micro-average f-score measure obtained by
our approach in the competition are shown in table
1.

track
trackb-r1
trackb-r2
subtrackb-r1
subtrackb-r2

corpus1 corpus2 corpus3

22.35
20.47
18.35
15.93

19.28
16.17
20.48
14.44

33.59
29.90
32.08
27.48

total
25.36
22.66
23.15
19.18

table 1: results for gplsiua approach.

although the micro-fscore results are not very
high, the results obtained by our approach are the
highest in all of the corpus evaluated by the organiz-
ers. our approach obtained an improvement of 7%
compared with the other participant in track b and
a 6.48% in subtrack b.

9we

have

used

pycluster

tool:

https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pycluster

6 conclusions

the results show that our approach is suitable for the
task in hand. on the one hand, temporal information
is automatically extracted with a temporal informa-
tion processing system which makes it possible to
infer and determine the time at which each event has
occurred. on the other hand, the semantic similar-
ity based on the verb is suf   cient to group together
coreferent events.

the basic method (run 1), consisting of search-
ing for similar verb lemma, eventually proved to be
the best. we have therefore carried out an in-depth
analysis of the results obtained for run 2 and have
observed three main drawbacks in the topic model-
ing approach:

    the id116 algorithm forces us to    x the
number of clusters beforehand, and this has
been    xed at 2. however, there is often only
one correct cluster. another approach without
a    xed number of topics will improve the ap-
proach. bejan and harabagiu (2014), for ex-
ample, suggest inferring this value from data.

    the representativity of each event mention de-
pends directly on the amount of topics ex-
tracted from the reference corpus. many top-
ics will produce excessive granularity, and few
topics will be unrepresentative. we have set
the number of topics at 500, but it is necessary
to study whether another amount of topics will
improve the results.

    this approach depends excessively on the rep-
resentativity of the reference corpus. we be-
lieve using larger corpora should improve the
results.

as future work, we plan to use other similarity
measures and id91 algorithms in an attempt
to solve the problem of previously    xed number of
clusters. we also plan to evaluate using different
id96 con   gurations.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
helpful suggestions and comments. paper partially supported
by the following projects: attos (tin2012-38536-c03-03),
legolang-uage (tin2012-31224), sam (fp7-611312),
first (fp7-287607) diim2.0 (prometeoii/2014/001)

james pustejovsky, 2006. timeml annotation guide-
lines 1.2.1 (http://www.timeml.org/).

references

[bejan and harabagiu2014] cosmin adrian bejan and
sanda harabagiu.
unsupervised event
coreference resolution. computational linguistics,
40(2):311   347.

2014.

[blei et al.2003] david m blei, andrew y ng, and
michael i jordan. 2003. id44.
journal of machine learning research, 3:993   1022.
2012. probabilistic topic

[blei2012] david m blei.

models. communications of the acm, 55(4):77   84.

[collobert et al.2011] ronan collobert, jason weston,
l  eon bottou, michael karlenand koray kavukcuoglu,
and pavel kuksa. 2011. natural language processing
(almost) from scratch. journal of machine learning
research, pages 41   71.

[cybulska and vossen2013] agata cybulska and piek
vossen. 2013. semantic relations between events and
their time, locations and participants for event corefer-
ence resolution. in ranlp.

[fellbaum1998] christiane fellbaum. 1998. id138:
an electronic lexical database (language, speech,
and communication). mit press.

[hovav et al.2010] malka rappaport hovav, edit doron,
and ivy sichel. 2010. lexical semantics, syntax, and
event structure. oxford university press, oxford.

[levin and rappaport-hovav2005] beth

and
malka rappaport-hovav. 2005. argument realiza-
tion. cambridge university press, cambridge.

levin

[llorens et al.2010] hector llorens, estela saquete, and
borja navarro-colorado. 2010. tipsem (english
and spanish): evaluating crfs and semantic roles in
tempeval-2. in proceedings of the 5th international
workshop on semantic evaluation.

[llorens et al.2012] hector llorens, estela saquete, and
borja navarro-colorado. 2012. automatic system
for identifying and categorizing temporal relations
in natural language. international journal of intelli-
gent systems, 27(7):680   703.

[llorens et al.2013] hector llorens, estela saquete, and
borja navarro-colorado. 2013. applying semantic
knowledge to the automatic processing of temporal
expressions and events in natural language. infor-
mation processing & management, 49(1):179   197.

[mccallum2002] andrew kachites mccallum.

2002.
mallet: a machine learning for language toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.

[pustejovsky et al.2003] james pustejovsky,

jos  e m.
ingria, roser saur    , robert
casta  no, robert
gaizauskas, andrea setzer,
and graham katz.
2003. timeml: robust speci   cation of event and
temporal expressions in text. in iwcs-5.

[saur     et al.2006] roser saur    , jessica littman, robert
knippen, robert gaizauskas, andrea setzer, and

