using network science and text analytics to produce surveys in a scienti   c topic

filipi n. silvaa, diego r. amanciob,   , maria bardosovac, luciano da f. costaa, osvaldo n. oliveira jra

as  ao carlos institute of physics, university of s  ao paulo, s  ao carlos, brazil

binstitute of mathematics and computer science, university of s  ao paulo, s  ao carlos, brazil

ctyndall national institute, cork city, ireland

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

m
6
1

 
 
]
i
s
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
0
9
6
5
0

.

6
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

the use of science to understand its own structure is becoming popular, but understanding the organization of knowledge
areas is still limited because some patterns are only discoverable with proper computational treatment of large-scale
datasets.
in this paper, we introduce a framework to combine network-based methodologies and text analytics to
construct the taxonomy of science    elds. the methodology is illustrated with application to two topics: complex networks
(cn) and photonic crystals (pc). we built id191 using data from the web of science and used a community
detection algorithm for partitioning to obtain science maps for the two topics. we also created an importance index for
text analytics, which is employed to extract keywords that de   ne the communities and, combined with network topology
metrics, to generate dendrograms of relatedness among subtopics.
interesting patterns emerging from the analysis
included identi   cation of two well-de   ned communities in pc area, which is consistent with the known existence of two
distinct communities of researchers in the area: telecommunication engineers and physicists. with the methodology, it
was also possible to assess the interdisciplinary nature and time evolution of subtopics de   ned by the keywords. the
automatic tools described here are potentially useful not only to provide an overview of scienti   c areas but also to assist
scientists in performing systematic research on a speci   c topic.

keywords:

id178, networks, scienti   c map, photonic crystals, pattern recognition

1. introduction

recent developments in the use of machine learning
methods to extract information (and knowledge!)
from
big data have shown that machines are bound to replace
humans in various intellectual tasks in the near future,
particularly in cases where a lot of information needs to
be processed (craddock et al., 2008; donovan, 2008; bell
et al., 2009). clear examples of such tasks are facial recog-
nition (zhao et al., 2003), establishing best routes for cars
and passengers (laporte, 1992), internet search (lawrence
and giles, 1998), etc. some authors have even been bold
enough to suggest that scienti   c and technological devel-
opment is being held back by the limited capacity of hu-
mans, especially the memory, to process and interpret the
electronic data available (stone and lavine, 2014). a spe-
ci   c task in academic work where this limited capacity is
readily apparent is in carrying out a survey of any given
topic, owing to the vast literature to be consulted. the
   rst requirement for a survey, namely to establish a map
of knowledge (also known as science map) of the    eld un-
der analysis, demands data-intensive discovery. surveys
normally performed by humans bene   t from well-founded
techniques to organize scienti   c literature and informa-
tion, but little help exists for understanding the knowledge

   corresponding author
email address: diego@icmc.usp.br (diego r. amancio)

structure on a larger scale. even experienced researchers
   nd this hard owing to the aforementioned human limited
capacity, and there is the additional drawback of bias -
even if unintentional - toward the experts    personal pref-
erences. not surprisingly, modeling the knowledge struc-
ture remains an open problem in science with the intricate
relationships among the many concepts involved.

in this paper we propose a new framework to assist
humans in preparing literature surveys, which consists of
the integration of many well-established concepts arising
from complex networks (barabasi and albert, 1999) that
have been proven e   ective in modeling the organization of
knowledge (boyack et al., 2005; b  orner and scharnhorst,
2009; costa et al., 2011; silva et al., 2013; boyack and kla-
vans, 2014). our approach, however, distinguishes itself
from previous ones in the literature since network science
and text analytics methods are interwoven to generate sci-
ence maps and taxonomies. more speci   cally, we build
id191 (chen and hicks, 2004; menczer, 2004;
leicht et al., 2007) that serve as the overall framework
of a science map, which needs to be complemented with a
taxonomy to classify the contents of the map. we adapted
the methodologies to extract keywords to complete the sci-
ence map for two    elds, namely    complex networks    and
   photonic crystals   . this choice was basically due to the
authors of the paper being experts in these    elds, which
allows for a deeper discussion of the results obtained.

preprint submitted to elsevier

march 17, 2016

2. overview of complex networks and text ana-

lytics applied to summarization

because our study deals with two very distinct areas,
namely use of complex network methods to analyze scien-
ti   c literature and text analytics, a brief overview of previ-
ous work will be done here for these areas. this overview
is by no means exhaustive, particularly as there has been
a vast literature in each of these areas; we rather concen-
trate on work that is directly related to the purpose of our
study, which is to provide semi-automated means for as-
sisting authors in surveys of the literature and document
summarization techniques silva et al. (2011).

recent works have used network-based metrics to char-
acterize or quantify relevance and impact of researchers,
publications and journals (ding et al., 2009; yan et al.,
2013; nykl et al., 2015; zhou et al., 2015; mckeown et al.,
2016). for instance, factor analysis was employed to au-
tomatically extract the most important papers in cita-
tion networks (chen, 2012). citation-based networks have
been used in various domains, such as modeling the dy-
namics of knowledge acquisition and dissemination (b  orner
and scharnhorst, 2009; amancio et al., 2012c; amancio,
2015a), enriching and contextualizing information of bio-
logical experiments or data (mullen et al., 2014), and visu-
alizing relationships among scienti   c    elds by constructing
science maps (boyack et al., 2005; leydesdor    and rafols,
2009; b  orner et al., 2012).

of particular importance are science maps used as a
versatile tool to qualitatively understand how science    elds
are organized, by e.g. establishing relationships among dis-
tinct areas (boyack et al., 2005; leydesdor    and rafols,
2009; porter and rafols, 2009; rosvall and bergstrom,
2008; silva et al., 2010, 2011). tools have been devel-
oped to visualize and interact with scienti   c maps (boy-
ack et al., 2002; van eck and waltman, 2010; waaijer
et al., 2011; silva and costa, 2011; silva et al., 2013; van
eck and waltman, 2014), and understand interdisciplinar-
ity (porter and rafols, 2009; leydesdor    et al., 2013; silva
et al., 2013; lariviere et al., 2015; leydesdor    et al., 2015)
among scienti   c journals.
in a similar fashion, science
maps can also be constructed by using self-organizing maps
in which scienti   c domains are mapped to a 2d space ac-
cording to a neural network through a hebbian learning
process (skupin et al., 2013). while science maps are able
to provide interesting insights about the overall structure
of science, a contextualized taxonomy of its structure is
more appropriate to the task of surveying a scienti   c    eld.
this is because survey papers are conventionally organized
in a hierarchical structure, normally comprising chapters,
sections, subsections and other forms of text partitions.
establishing such taxonomy, with components and sub-
components hierarchically organized, is not trivial for au-
tomated tools (sebastiani, 2002; silva et al., 2013), and
various procedures have been adopted to classify contents.
text summarization is a traditional area of text ana-
lytics, which has been used to build summaries and tax-

onomies of text datasets comprising many types of situa-
tions, such as tracing the events of disasters using social
media (kedzie et al., 2015), conferences (shen et al., 2013)
and sports events (nichols et al., 2012). the main goal
with such techniques is to obtain an importance metric
(also called salience) for terms or sentences. the sum-
mary of the content can be constructed by rewriting the
text using only terms or sentences presenting high salience,
while the taxonomies can be obtained by id91 texts
according to the similarities among their most important
terms. this can be accomplished through the use of met-
rics such as cosine similarity (salton and buckley, 1988)
or semantic-wise similarities (boyack et al., 2011), as in
relationships in the id138 or id27 tech-
niques (levy and goldberg, 2014). a simple way to obtain
the salience of terms is by comparing their relative fre-
quency of appearance inside a document to their frequency
of appearance in a larger set of other documents. this is
usually referred to as the tf-idf (salton and buckley,
1988) method, which yields good results for sets of large
texts. however, the method becomes unreliable when mea-
suring relevance of terms in sets of small texts, since terms
tend to appear only a few times for each document, as in
paper abstracts and messages of social networking services.
other, more complex, summarization techniques can be
used to deal with such type of data. examples are super-
vised machine learning methods that require a small set of
golden summaries used to train a machine to detect impor-
tant terms. human readable summaries may be generated
from a document or a set of documents (radev and mck-
eown, 1998) by using features of low contextual content,
such as the average number of words or the number of
capitalized words in a sentence (nenkova and mckeown,
2012).

as an alternative to machine learning methods, topics
analysis (blei et al., 2003) has been employed to    nd im-
portant terms (keywords) in a set of documents, such as
articles or abstracts (gri   ths and steyvers, 2004), where
terms are projected and clustered according to their pres-
ence in a set of documents. this is done by estimating a
markov chain model of topic information along the docu-
ments, normally obtained by id150. this tech-
nique presents high computational cost, as it requires sev-
eral iterations to estimate the transitions between words,
but it can give good results depending on the size of each
document, the number of documents and other proper-
ties of the dataset, as studied in depth by tang et. al in
ref. (tang et al., 2014).

methods derived from network science have also been
used for document summarization. the lexrank tech-
nique (erkan and radev, 2004) relies upon a network of
similarity between sentences to obtain topological central-
ity measurements, such as eigenvector centrality newman
(2010). the centrality measurements are then used to
quantify the salience of terms. in a similar fashion, word
adjacency networks were employed to    nd keywords in a
text (amancio et al., 2012b), where salience was obtained

2

from the diversity measurement of nodes (viana et al.,
2010) and provided superior results to traditional central-
ity measurements in networks. such kind of analysis is
advantageous compared to multiple text analytics meth-
ods for the same dataset since information provided by
network based techniques does not overlap with that pro-
vided by traditional text analytics techniques (li et al.,
2012; newman and clauset, 2015; amancio, 2015b; silva
and amancio, 2012; amancio et al., 2012e).

3. methodology

a survey paper is taken here as an organized structure
that summarizes information about a scienti   c    eld.
it
must limit the level of detail for each topic by highlighting
the most relevant pieces of information while also reducing
their redundancy. the hierarchy in a survey comprises
concepts that are progressively merged together by their
relatedness to build major contextual structures such as
subsections and sections, as exempli   ed in fig. 1. topics
are hierarchically structured, each of which can represent a
set of papers or other scienti   c works relevant to the area.

figure 1: example of the structure of an organized scienti   c survey.
papers are grouped into more general topics which are re   ected as
sections, subsections, chapters, etc. a threshold of relevance and
focus is thus necessary as their content needs to be summarized and
cannot retain the full level of detail for each paper.

to determine the hierarchy of components and subcom-
ponents, we    rst built id191 for the    elds com-
plex networks (cn) and photonic crystals (pc), whose
papers were retrieved from the web of science (wos)1
database using the query terms    complex network    and

1http://thomsonreuters.com/thomson-reuters-web-of-science/

3

   photonic crystal    (including the plural variations), re-
spectively. for each retrieved paper, we extracted the title,
abstract, publication year, citation count and list of ref-
erences. two id191 were built (cn and pc)
where nodes represent the papers and an edge was estab-
lished between two papers if one cites the other.

there are many ways to construct citations-based net-
works. they can be drawn directly from the citation struc-
ture, in which two papers are connected if there is a cita-
tion between them, resulting in an unweighted directed
network. also used in several studies are co-citation net-
works (   usdiken and pasadeos, 1995; jenssen et al., 2001;
chen, 2004; ding et al., 2009), where documents are con-
nected if they share a citation with at least another docu-
ment. this procedure leads to a weighted undirected net-
work, and the number of shared documents can be used
as a metric of similarity among documents.

for the sake of simplicity, here we opted to use tradi-
tional id191, but we do not take into account
the direction of citation connections. we understand that
this information is relevant in several other studies (chen
and hicks, 2004; menczer, 2004), but not here because we
use id191 to represent a knowledge relationship
structure which is naturally undirected. as an alternative,
we also applied the analysis presented in this work to co-
id191 as shown in the supplementary material,
and found similar results in the analysis. however, such
networks are denser and harder to discuss and visualize.

the id191 were constructed by    rst ob-
taining the vertices from papers returned from the cho-
sen queries for cn and pc in the web of science dataset.
next, citation information was used to connect pairs of
cited papers where papers that were not present in the
initial queries were ignored (even if cited by others). this
avoids problems caused by dangling nodes, which can im-
pact the topological analysis employed here, such as com-
munity detection.

id191 can be transformed into science maps
if the most relevant topics and their inter-relationships
are identi   ed.
in this study, the cn and pc citation
networks were embedded in a 3d space using a force-
directed method based on the fruchterman-reingold algo-
rithm (fruchterman and reingold, 1991). the initial con-
   guration had the nodes, treated as particles, uniformly
distributed over a 3d space. these nodes were allowed
to interact via repulsive forces, with attractive forces be-
ing added for the connected nodes. when the energy of
the whole system was minimized, the resulting embedding
became a graphically appealing projection of the network-
topology (silva et al., 2013; bando et al., 2013). in print,
only static 2d projections of the network can be visual-
ized, but the network structure can be further examined
with a visualization tool (silva et al., 2013; bando et al.,
2013). this is important because real system topologies
may exhibit very high dimension, hence not suitable to be
projected on the plane (daqing et al., 2011).

the main topics in a    eld are associated with communi-

main topictopic 1-2paper apaper cpaper dpaper epaper fpaper gpaper hpaper ipaper jpaper kpaper lpaper mpaper nsection 1general topicsspecific topicssection 2section 3relevance thresholdties in the id191, which were determined by ap-
plying the multilevel community detection method (blon-
del et al., 2008). this procedure assigns each paper to a
non-overleaping community. it was chosen because it al-
lows for establishing a high modularity for the network,
while keeping the computational cost reasonable in com-
parison with more sophisticated methods such as the opti-
mum modularity (newman, 2006). by a high modularity
we mean that the communities in the network are well
distinguishable from each other. it is important to high-
light that the multilevel community detection method is
stochastic, thus, for each run, a distinct community struc-
ture can be attained for the same network. however,
as discussed in ref. (blondel et al., 2008), the resulting
community partitioning for distinct runs are very sim-
ilar among themselves and display high correspondence
to those obtained by other algorithms or expected from
benchmarks.

the relationships among communities were further ex-
amined by generating a coarse-grained graph of the net-
work (rosvall and bergstrom, 2008), in which each com-
munity was replaced by a single community node and its
connections. the edges between each pair of community
nodes (  ,   ) were weighted by w     according to the stochas-
tic id203 of connections between communities    and
   given by:

w     =

e    
|  ||  | ,

(1)

where e     is the number of connections among nodes of
communities    and   .

since determining the communities which are most cen-
tral or peripheral in the science map is an important tar-
get, we employed the accessibility metric (traven  colo and
costa, 2008; traven  colo et al., 2009; arruda et al., 2014;
amancio, 2015b), which is a local node-centered measure-
ment based on the heterogeneity of probabilities of reach-
ing nodes in random walk dynamics. the smaller the
accessibility of a node the more peripheral it is. this
metric has been successful in separating the topological
center and border regions of networks while avoiding the
drawbacks of traditional measurements such as between-
ness centrality.

ideally, the communities in the citation network should

be labeled with the topics and subtopics of a well-established
taxonomy for the scienti   c    eld under analysis. however,
as already mentioned in the introduction, there is no sim-
ple way to generate such high-level taxonomy automati-
cally. most authors have therefore resorted to extracting
keywords (see refs. andrade and valencia (1998); man-
ning and sch  utze (1999); hulth (2003); carretero-campos
et al. (2013) for methods of keyword extraction), for which
the majority of the methods make use of large amounts of
text.
in our case, because we only considered the ab-
stracts from each paper (representing a node in the net-
work), we had to adapt existing methods. we devised
a measurement to quantify the importance of keywords,

made with unigrams and bigrams, for each network com-
munity. unigrams and bigrams were extracted for each pa-
per by analyzing its abstract, from which stop-words were
removed and the remaining words were lemmatized. this
pre-processing step is essential for the analysis because it
removes words conveying little semantic content and se-
mantically related words are aliased under the same word
if they share the same canonical form (amancio et al.,
2012a,d; amancio, 2015a). the importance index was de-
signed to quantify the relative frequency of a word ap-
pearing inside a community against its frequency on the
remainder of the network. first, we count the total num-
ber of times n  (w) a paper presenting a word w appears
inside a community   . next, we calculate the relative in-
community frequency, f in

   (w) given by:

n  (w)
|  |

f in

,

   (w) =

(2)
where |  | is the number of papers associated with a com-
munity   . analogously, we de   ne a relative out-community
frequency:

f out

   (w) =

n  (w)
n     |  | ,

(3)

(cid:88)

  (cid:54)=  

which accounts for the total relative frequency considering
all communities excluding   , where n is the total num-
ber of papers in the network. then, we de   ne our mea-
surement of importance of keywords, i(w), as the high-
est di   erence between the relative in-community and out-
community frequencies of a word:
   (w)     f out
[f in

i(w) = max

   (w)].

(4)

  

the keywords ranked according to the importance in-
dex i(w) were used to create trees to simulate the structure
of a survey, as shown figure 1. the hierarchy tree (dendro-
gram) was obtained by a hierarchical agglomerative clus-
tering method (duda et al., 2001; costa and cesar, 2009),
in which we used the average shortest path length, (cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)uv,
among pairs of keywords (u, v). in this procedure, we    rst
obtained the shortest path lengths (cid:96)ij between the pairs of
papers (i, j) in the citation network. next, for each key-
word pair (u, v) we calculated the average of (cid:96)ij among
pairs of abstracts (ai, aj) of papers (i, j), where the key-
words u and v were respectively present. this can also be
written by the following equation:

(cid:104)(cid:96)(cid:105)uv =

(u,v)     (ai  aj )

(cid:96)ij

|(u, v)     (ai    aj)| .

(5)

(cid:88)

as a consequence, groups of keywords are progressively
clustered together according to the average topological dis-
tance between them. therefore, our approach to generat-
ing dendrograms incorporates both concepts from complex
networks and from text analytics. this was crucial because
id91 the keywords using only the abstracts would not
be precise as the amount of text is limited.

4

since unigrams and bigrams were ranked according
to the same measurement,
if a bigram has high i(w),
their compounded unigrams are very likely to also feature
among the top keywords. to address this problem, we re-
moved the unigrams from the set of keywords that are part
of any other bigram in the set. by doing this, we eliminate
an immediate layer of redundancy among keywords while
also giving priority to more speci   c keywords(bigrams).
for the pc    eld, we also generated a dendogram using
keywords suggested by an expert, in which we omitted
generic keywords covering more than 50% of the network
(e.g. photonic crystals and    ber ).

the temporal evolution of the    elds considered was
studied in terms of timelines for the keywords, i.e. how
the frequency of each keyword changed over time.

the proposed methodology can be summarized as fol-

lows:

1. obtain the citation network among the papers of the

corresponding dataset.

2. obtain the words, corresponding to the id165s present

on both titles and abstracts of each paper. here, we
considered only unigrams and bigrams for the analy-
sis. also, we removed stop-words and the remaining
words were lemmatized.

3. apply a community detection algorithm to the net-
work, thus obtaining a partitioning of papers. here,
we opted to use a fast multilevel technique (blondel
et al., 2008).

4. calculate the in-community frequencies, f in

   (w), for
each word w for all the communities, according to
equation 2.

5. calculate the out-community frequencies, f out

   (w),

according to equation 3.

6. calculate the importance index, i(w), of each word

w using equation 4.

7. sort the words according to the importance index
and select an amount from the top. here, we selected
the    rst 50 keywords to pair a similar amount of
keywords provided by an expert.

8. apply a hierarchical id91 method to the se-
lected keywords, where the dissimilarity between two
keywords corresponds to the average topological dis-
tance between papers presenting such words. this
procedure results in the dendrogram of keywords.

9. the keywords can also be used to label the commu-

nities they belong to.

10. by using network visualization techniques, project
the network to a 2d or 3d space and use the commu-
nities and the generated labels to obtain a scienti   c
map (fruchterman and reingold, 1991; silva et al.,
2013; bando et al., 2013). in this work we employed
the fruchterman-reingold algorithm and, for com-
parison purpose, we also use the vosviewer (van
eck and waltman, 2010) visualization tool.

it should be noted that the techniques employed in
each step of our framework can be replaced by similar

5

methods. for instance, one can use other visualization
tools and techniques to construct science maps, or one
can employ other community detection algorithms. while
an extensive combination of techniques and parameters is
still needed to uncover bene   ts and disadvantages of the
framework, here we illustrate it by choosing only one set
of methods and parameters. these correspond to the most
traditional or simple methods required for each step.

4. results and discussion

we obtained two networks from the dataset, the cn
network comprising 11, 063 papers with average degree
out (cid:105)     8.5, and the pc network encompassing 20, 230
(cid:104)kcn
papers and presenting (cid:104)kp c
out(cid:105)     6.6. papers published from
1991 to 2013 were included in the networks. the struc-
ture of the cn network revealed 22 communities yielding
a modularity qcn     0.53, while 20 communities were iden-
ti   ed with modularity qp c     0.65 for the pc network.

4.1. cn network analysis

fig. 2(a) displays the science map from the cn citation
network, where the colors denote the communities associ-
ated with the top keywords according to the importance
index of eq. 4. as expected by the high modularity, each
module    lls distinctive regions of the network topology.
the only exception appears to be communities b and d
that seem to share the same region, but this is an artifact
of the 2d projection. a clear separation is con   rmed in
the 3d visualization (as shown in video s1 in the supple-
mentary material). it is interesting that most communities
originate from a densely central region of the projection,
as can be observed in the    gure. this indicates that nodes
at the central region are much more interdisciplinary.

the coarse-grained graph of the cn network is shown
in fig. 2(b), which features communities b, c and d
strongly connected among themselves. community b (epi-
demic spreading dynamics) glues together many commu-
nities, being at the heart of the network alongside commu-
nity h (fractal, self-similar). this is probably because epi-
demic dynamics represented by community b has a wide
variety of applications in network science (costa et al.,
2011). in spite of being the largest community, a (syn-
chronization and coupling) only connects strongly to g
(brain and cortical networks), highlighting the applica-
tion of synchronization dynamics to modeling neuronal
networks. surprisingly, community e (gene regulatory
networks, protein interaction, etc) is the lesser connected
among the communities. besides, it presents no remark-
able connection preference pattern, i.e. it is uniformly and
weakly connected to other communities. this indicates
that papers in this community still do not fully bene   t
from the tools and methodologies provided by network sci-
ence.

the dendrogram obtained by id91 the top key-
words, shown in fig. 2(c), provided interesting insights.

figure 2: projection of the cn network (a) obtained by force-directed embedding with node colors representing the communities. the
legends shows top keywords for each community ranked according to eq. 4. the relationships among communities obtained for the cn
network are displayed in a coarse-grained diagram (b). the diagram is obtained by collapsing each community in a single node with edges
weighted by the fraction of original edges existing against all possible between two communities. edges are represented by lines with thickness
and intensity proportional to their weights. the top 50 keywords for the entire cn network are displayed in a dendrogram (c) built with the
hierarchical agglomerative clusterization method applied to the topological distance between the keywords.

for instance, keywords from the    eld of ecological appli-
cations of complex networks associated with papers con-
taining the words    ecosystem   ,    food web    and    biodi-
versity   , are closely related among themselves. although
further investigations are needed to explain some counter
intuitive exceptions such as the branch containing the key-
words    promote   ,    player    and    animal   , on the whole,
the relationships between keywords are well described by
the dendrogram and appears consistent with what should
be expected from an expert in the area.

the analysis was complemented using the accessibility
metric. the cumulative distribution of accessibility for
h = 3 taken over all nodes of the cn network is presented
in fig. 3. we chose to calculate accessibility for level h =

3 because node-centered measurements taken around the
immediate neighborhood of a node (i.e. for h = 1 or h = 2)
may depend on its degree (costa and silva, 2006). also,
because the networks are small-world, the measurement
may su   er from border e   ects for large h. the data is
grouped together by the community membership of nodes,
hence each community has a di   erent curve of cumulative
accessibility distribution. with the data so presented it is
easy to determine the percentage of nodes below or above
a certain accessibility threshold. for instance, community
b possesses only roughly 10% of nodes with accessibility
1000 or lower.

we consider peripheral those communities containing
many vertices with low accessibility. the area under the

6

dist  ncia topol  gicaefcjigbhdasynchronization, coupling, delay, lyapunov, dynamical networkepidemic spreading, infect, susceptible, outbreak, epidemic modellanguage, text, software system, market, software engineeringtraffic, cascade failure, attack, congestion, loadgene, cell, protein interaction, regulatory, biologicalcommunity structure, community detection, modularity, algorithm, partitionbrain network, functional connectivity, cortical, functional network, healthyfractal, self similar, first passage, passage time, random walkdilemma game, cooperation, prisoner dilemma, evolutionary, payofftime series, construct, climate, visibility graph, phase spacespecie, ecological, food web, plant, ecosystemqsar, drug, quantitative structure, molecular, compoundabcdefghijklrecommendation, user, similarity, link prediction, bipartitej(a)(b)(c)figure 3: curves of cumulative distribution of accessibility obtained for the cn network communities. the curves are presented in color
according to the inset. on top of the    gure the total area under the curves of each community is shown, which is related to the centrality or
peripheral nature of its nodes.

accessibility curves can be used to rank the communities
according to their pertinence to the borders of the net-
work. communities covering a large area under the curves
are at the boundaries of the network, as displayed on the
top of fig. 3. community j (time series, climate and vis-
ibility graph) is the most peripheral, followed by i (game,
cooperation and prisoner dilemma) and e (protein, gene
and cell networks). in particular, community e has about
20% of papers with very low accessibility. communities
g (brain and cortical networks), a (synchronization and
coupling) and f (community structure and community de-
tection) are close together and present average values of
accessibility. the curves for h (fractal, self similar and
   rst passage), c (language, text and software system) and
d (tra   c, attack, cascade failure) also present similar pat-
terns of accessibility among themselves and are much more
at the core of the network than the aforementioned com-
munities.

corroborating the qualitative results from the analysis
of the coarse grained graph, the most central community
was b. the central core of the network is composed of
communities related to techniques of network dynamics
such as cascade failure, epidemic spreading dynamics and
self-similarity techniques. on the borders are found more
speci   c applications of networks such as cell networks co-
operation and time series analysis.

4.2. pc network analysis

the most striking feature of the science map repre-
sented by the pc network is its diploid nature, with two
very distinct giant communities visualized in figure 4(a).
from the analysis of keywords associated with these giant
communities it is readily noted that they refer to scien-
tists from very distinct areas. the smaller giant commu-
nity comprises papers from telecommunications, e.g. with
keywords deriving from the photonic crystal    ber topic.

indeed, the keywords related to the communities from this
giant community are (con   nement loss, long period, high
birefringence) for a, (supercontinuum generation, soliton)
for f , (   ber laser, erbium dope, dope    ber) for k and
(porous silicon, silicon photonic, monitor) for m . the
authors in this giant community are normally engineers
exploiting    bers for telecommunications. the larger giant
community is made of papers authored by experts in the
development of the science of photonic crystals, mostly
physicists. the interface between the two giant communi-
ties is quite thin, as shown in the    gure, thus indicating
little scienti   c interaction across the two enlarged commu-
nities.

the interface between the two giant communities is
better visualized in the coarse-grained graph in fig. 4(b),
featuring connections from nodes in communities e (one
dimensional, transfer matrix, matrix method, omnidirec-
tional), g (negative refraction, self collimation), i (detec-
tion, biosensor, label free) and especially l (vertical cav-
ity, cavity surface, vcsel, surface emit). also clear from the
coarse-grained graph is the di   culty in establishing which
communities are most central or peripheral owing to the
diploid nature of the network.

here is a case where the accessibility metric is most
useful. because it is a local measurement, it avoids the
pitfalls of other global centrality measurements when used
to characterize networks presenting no well-de   ned border
and central regions. when applied to the pc network, the
analysis of cumulative accessibility in figure 5 revealed
that communities k and l are those most at the bor-
ders, followed by communities e, h and j. communities
c and b are the most central in the network. commu-
nity a can also be considered a central community on
this smaller giant component. analogously to what was
observed for the cn network, general concepts of the pc
   eld were found in the core of the system, such as papers of

7

010002000300040005000accessibility h=30102030405060708090100cumulative percentage of nodesa - synchronization, coupling, delay, lyapunov, dynamical networkb - epidemic spreading, infect, susceptible, outbreak, epidemic modelc - language, text, software system, market, software engineeringd - traffic, cascade failure, attack, congestion, loade - gene, cell, protein interaction, regulatory, biologicalf - community structure, community detection, modularity, algorithm, partitiong - brain network, functional connectivity, cortical, functional network, healthyh - fractal, self similar, first passage, passage time, random walki - dilemma game, cooperation, prisoner dilemma, evolutionary, payoffj - time series, construct, climate, visibility graph, phase spacebcafigdjhearea under the curvesperipheralcentralfigure 4: projection (a), coarse-grained diagram (b) and keywords dendrogram (c) of the pc network obtained in the same fashion as fig. 2.

figure 5: cumulative accessibility distribution obtained for the pc network communities.

8

cgheibdlajfktopological distanceconfinement loss, long period, period grating, high birefringence, modal birefringencecrystal waveguide, slow light, waveguide bend, group index, degree bendcrystal cavity, quantum dot, cristal nanocavity, crystal laser, quality factoropal, template, colloidal crystal, sphere, self assembleone dimensional, transfer matrix, matrix method, omnidirectional, magnetosupercontinuum generation, soliton, pulse, dispersion wavelength, zero dispersionnegative refraction, self collimation, flat lens, surface mode, superprismlight extraction, diode led, light emitting, extraction efficiency, solar celldetection, crystal biosensor, label free, protein, high sensitivityhollow core, core photonic, gas fill, fill hollow, kagomefiber laser, erbium dope, dope fiber, multiwavelength, brillouinvertical cavity, cavity surface, vcsel, surface emit, emit laserabcdefghijkl(a)(b)(c)0200040006000accessibility h=30102030405060708090100cumulative percentage of nodesa - confinement loss, long period, period grating, high birefringence, modal birefringenceb - crystal waveguide, slow light, waveguide bend, group index, degree bendc - crystal cavity, quantum dot, cristal nanocavity, crystal laser, quality factord - opal, template, colloidal crystal, sphere, self assemblee - one dimensional, transfer matrix, matrix method, omnidirectional, magnetof - supercontinuum generation, soliton, pulse, dispersion wavelength, zero dispersiong - negative refraction, self collimation, flat lens, surface mode, superprismh - light extraction, diode led, light emitting, extraction efficiency, solar celli - detection, crystal biosensor, label free, protein, high sensitivityj - hollow core, core photonic, gas fill, fill hollow, kagomek - fiber laser, erbium dope, dope fiber, multiwavelength, brillouinl - vertical cavity, cavity surface, vcsel, surface emit, emit laserbcafigdjhelkarea under the curvesperipheralcentralfigure 6: projection (a), coarse-grained diagram (b) and dendrogram (c) with the keywords provided by an expert for the pc network.
di   erently from figs. 2, and 4, the regions depicted by colors in (a) correspond to the groups obtained after applying a threshold on the
dendrogram as indicated by a dashed red line in (c).

communities b and c comprising nodes having keywords
   nanocavity   ,    quantum dot   ,    waveguide   ,    slow light   ,
etc. on the other hand, more speci   c methodologies and
applications are scattered on the borders of the network,
such as in papers containing the keywords       ber laser   ,
   erbium dope   ,    vertical cavity   ,    transfer matrix   ,    one
dimensional   , etc. the taxonomy reached by using the au-
tomated keywords for the pc network is consistent with
expectation from experts, as indicated in the dendrogram
of fig. 4(c).

we also used a list of 67 keywords, containing up to 4
words each, provided by one of the authors (mb), expert
in the pc    eld. the dendrogram was constructed with the
same approach as for the automated keywords in fig. 6(c).
it also provides valuable insights about the area, such as
the fact that negative refraction index is closely related

to metamaterials, which in turn are key concepts for the
technology that allows the development of an invisibility
cloak (schurig et al., 2006; soric et al., 2013). another
example concerns the keyword liquid crystal, which ap-
pears, as expected, close to photonic bandgap. a science
map of the pc network was obtained using the experts
keywords, where partitioning was reached by applying a
threshold (as shown by the dashed line and group labels
in fig. 6(c)) to the dendrogram. the nodes were assigned
to a community when their corresponding abstracts shared
a large number of keywords that de   ne a speci   c group.
a comparison of figs. 4(a) and 6(a) points to a narrower
coverage of nodes for the keywords suggested by the ex-
pert for the small giant community associated with the
telecommunications area. this was indeed expected be-
cause the expert (a physicist) has always worked with top-

9

bragg grating, raman scattering, bragg fiberslow light, semiconductor based photonic crystal, membrane...display, absorption, liquid crystal, photonic bandgapchiral, mirror, filter, carbon nanotube, nanotubehigh-q microcavitis, quantum dot, silicon photonic crystal chip...metamaterial, cloaking, negative refraction, negative refractive index...gan, laser light extractionchalcogenide, chalcogenide glass, all optical diodes, lab chip...superprism, demultiplexer, solar light trapping, control of light...biomimetic, atomic layer deposition, nanostructured thin film...photon phonon, plasmonic, nanoplasmonic, nanoantenna, quantum cascade laserwood pile, interference lithography, holographic lithography...photocatalysis, photovoltaic, solar cella   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   j   k   l   m   (a)(b)(c)adifghjlbcketopological distancea   b   j   k   l   m   n   o   p   i   h   g   f   e   d   c   ics akin to the large giant community and had less fa-
miliarity with the use of photonic crystals in telecommu-
nications. the coarse-grained network shown in fig. 6(b)
bears little resemblance to the one obtained from the com-
munity analysis of the network (4), with the groups of the
former connecting strongly among themselves. however, a
correspondence between some of the network communities
and the groups of the experts keywords partitioning can
be drawn by observing the communities sharing the same
regions of the network (i.e. sharing a similar set of nodes).
for instance, community g (in fig. 4(b)) shares the same
region as the group f (cid:48) (in fig. 6(b)), also displaying simi-
lar keywords, corresponding to subjects related to negative
refraction and cloaking. in the same fashion, communities
c and h share the same region of groups e(cid:48) and g(cid:48).

to illustrate the possible replacement of methods in
one of the steps of our framework, we also imported the
network and labeled partitions into the vosviewer tool (van
eck and waltman, 2010). this visualization software has
been used to construct scienti   c maps from network-based
data encompassing a diverse range of disciplines and sci-
enti   c    elds. figure 7 displays the projections attained by
the software. the existence of the two major groups in the
pc network is clearly more accentuated in the vos viewer
visualization than by using the force-directed method, both
in the positions (a) as well as in the density map (b). how-
ever, because of the anisotropic nature of the resulting
map, some other aspects of the network structure can-
not be observed clearly. for instance, it is di   cult to tell
how interconnected groups a and f are. in contrast, the
isotropic nature of the maps obtained by the force-directed
methodology reveals an informative interface between the
two groups, which is re   ected more clearly by the coarse-
grained analysis. nevertheless, the aims of the visualiza-
tion techniques are di   erent and may highlight distinct
characteristics of the data. perhaps the most useful ap-
proach is to use as many suitable visualization techniques
as possible to draw better conclusions and attain deeper
understanding of the datasets and of the analysis.

the temporal evolution of the areas was examined by
considering the timeline for the keywords. we counted
the number of abstracts which contain the top keywords
obtained from the ranking index in eq. 4. as the number
of papers may greatly vary with the years, the frequencies
were normalized by the total number of papers published
in the same year. the resulting timelines are shown in
fig. 8. because there are not many papers in the database
for the years before 2003 for the cn network, and 1998 for
the pc, only the subsequent years were considered.

the timelines con   rm the extraordinary growth of both
cn and pc areas (as shown on top of fig. 8), but the
growth rate decreased in the last few years. several areas
of cn have been growing: network applications to time se-
ries (lacasa et al., 2008; donner et al., 2010), synchroniza-
tion dynamics and analysis (arenas et al., 2008), commu-
nity detection (fortunato, 2010); while other subtopics are
shrinking, such as food web and species networks (dunne

et al., 2002), cooperation dynamics (yang et al., 2009)
and qsar model (santana et al., 2008). in pc    eld we
can also observe distinct growth patterns. the subtopics
hollow core photonic,    ber laser, erbium dope    ber, su-
percontinuum generation, detection, stable and biosensor
are still growing on the network, while usage of terms light
extraction e   ciency, diode led and negative refraction are
decreasing.

5. conclusion and future work

the main goal of this paper was to introduce methods
that could be used to automatically construct surveys on
a given scienti   c    eld. we proposed a methodology to
simultaneously analyze contextual information (in terms
of papers abstracts) and id191, and this was
applied to two    elds: complex networks and photonic
crystals. upon identifying communities, it was possible
to generate a taxonomy for these    elds.

several patterns could be inferred from the results. for
complex networks, for instance, border communities were
found to be related to regulatory and protein-protein in-
teraction networks, in addition to subtopics related to cli-
mate, time series and visibility graphs. the interpretation
is that these subtopics are not fully explored, at the mo-
ment, by the many complex networks analysis methods.

the pc network was peculiar in featuring two giant
communities, each of which could be identi   ed by ana-
lyzing the keywords. as expected, we found that one
giant community comprises telecommunication engineers
who use photonic crystal    bers in their applications, while
the other, larger community is composed mainly of physi-
cists. surprisingly, not much interaction exists between
the two communities, and this piece of information may
be valuable to foster collaboration in the future.

the approach proposed here to construct the taxon-
omy for a survey di   ers signi   cantly from what exists in
the literature. instead of using only similarities between
terms of each abstract, here a citation network was used to
provide both the distance among terms and the id91
(derived from the community structure).
in addition, a
simple text analytics technique was employed to provide
the salience of terms according to the obtained community
structure.

here, we did not compare our results to those obtained
from traditional text analytics techniques, particularly be-
cause the methods address two di   erent classes of prob-
lems. our approach takes into consideration how, in prac-
tice, researchers refer to other works in their    elds, which
may di   er signi   cantly from the similarity of terms ob-
tained using only the textual content. the discrepancy
between cited works and their contextual similarity has
been a recent topic of study, with an in-depth analysis
(amancio et al., 2012c; ciotti et al., 2016). we under-
stand that the organization of the scienti   c community,
i.e., the citation patterns among researchers and papers,
must play an important role for constructing a survey in a

10

figure 7: visualization of the pc network using the vosviewer visualization tool (van eck and waltman, 2010). the colors represent the
same communities displayed in    gure 4. both the network (a) and densities (b) are shown.

science    eld. in this context, our approach is more suitable
for this task than methods based solely on text similarity.
we can still compare the technical limitations of the
approach presented here and of those based on text an-
alytics. for instance, one of the main disadvantages of
topic analysis is the high computational cost involved in
estimating the markov model, which requires several iter-
ations of id150. this kind of analysis precludes
the study of bigrams and higher order id165s, while our
approach can be extended to account for id165s. in ad-
dition, the limitations of such analysis are not yet com-
pletely understood (tang et al., 2014). other methods
such as those based on supervised learning need the input
of annotated corpus or sets of golden summaries, which
are not commonly available in scienti   c datasets. we how-
ever should point out that our approach is strongly depen-
dent on the chosen network structure. if a co-authorship
network among papers was used, instead of the citation
network, the results should be interpreted in a di   erent
direction and could not be used, for instance, to construct
a survey. as for topic analysis, an extensive study of the
limitations of our approach is still needed to identify its
strengths and disadvantages.

several extensions of the approach we presented can be

performed in future works. for simplicity, we did not con-
sider the direction of the id191 or the strongly
asymmetric nature of the networks. these features could
play an important role in the understanding of how dis-
tinct    elds interact among themselves by citations.

in our methodology we did not take into consideration
the importance and redundancy of papers. these limita-
tions may be surpassed by using topological characteriza-
tion at the level of papers. future research should also
address the problem of quantifying the interdisciplinarity.
it is hoped that the approach inherent in the methods we
introduced can be applied to build new tools and assist
researchers in understanding their own or new specialty
areas.

acknowledgments

l. da f. costa thanks cnpq (grant no. 307333/2013-

2) and fapesp-mct/cnpq/pronex (grant no. 11/50761-
2) for support. f. n. silva acknowledges capes and
fapesp (grant no. 15/08003-4). d. r. amancio thanks
fapesp (grant no. 14/20830-0). o. n. oliveira jr ac-
knowledges fapesp and cnpq. m. bardosova acknowl-
edges science foundation ireland for support.

11

(a) network projection(b) clusters densities(a) complex networks

(b) photonic crystals

figure 8: normalized frequency of occurrence for each keyword among papers published in the time period considered. the head graphics
present the curves corresponding to the number of papers published in the corresponding years.

12

11472num.ofpapers2%4%specie1%4%timeseries1%2%foodweb1%15%synchronization2%8%communitystructure0%1%quantitativestructure0%3%brainnetwork0%2%prisonerdilemma3%5%molecular1%5%communitydetection0%2%compound0%1%qsarmodel0%1%structureactivity0%1%activityrelationship1%2%plant0%1%cooperator1%2%fractal0%2%ecosystem200320042005200620072008200920102011201220130%2%dilemmagame22227num.ofpapers1%4%hollowcore1%5%corephotonic0%5%   berlaser0%2%lightextraction0%2%erbiumdope0%2%dope   ber0%3%lightemitting0%2%emittingdiode0%1%extractionef   ciency0%3%lightemit1%4%supercontinuumgeneration0%2%emitdiode1%6%detection1%3%stable0%1%ringlaser0%1%diodeled0%1%biosensor0%2%laserbase1998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010201120120%3%negativerefractionreferences

amancio, d. r., 2015a. comparing the topological properties of real
and arti   cially generated scienti   c manuscripts. scientometrics
105 (3), 1763   1779.

amancio, d. r., 2015b. a complex network approach to stylometry.

plos one 10 (8), 1   21.

amancio, d. r., aluisio, s. m., oliveira jr., o. n., costa, l. da f.,
2012a. complex networks analysis of language complexity. epl
(europhysics letters) 100 (5), 58002.

amancio, d. r., nunes, m. g. v., oliveira jr., o. n., costa, l. da
f., 2012b. extractive summarization using complex networks and
syntactic dependency. physica a: statistical mechanics and its
applications 391 (4), 1855   1864.

amancio, d. r., nunes, m. g. v., oliveira jr., o. n., costa, l. da
f., 2012c. using complex networks concepts to assess approaches
for citations in scienti   c papers. scientometrics 91 (3), 827   842.

amancio, d. r., oliveira jr., o. n., costa, l. da f., 2012d. identi   -
cation of literary movements using complex networks to represent
texts. new journal of physics 14 (4), 043029.

amancio, d. r., oliveira jr., o. n., costa, l. da f., 2012e. on
the use of topological features and hierarchical characterization
for disambiguating names in collaborative networks. epl (euro-
physics letters) 99 (4), 48002.

andrade, m. a., valencia, a., 1998. automatic extraction of key-
words from scienti   c text: application to the knowledge domain
of protein families. bioinformatics 14 (7), 600   607.

arenas, a., d    az-guilera, a., kurths, j., moreno, y., zhou, c., 2008.
synchronization in complex networks. physics reports 469 (3),
93   153.

arruda, g. f., barbieri, a. l., rodr    guez, p. m., rodrigues, f. a.,
moreno, y., costa, l. da f., 2014. role of centrality for the iden-
ti   cation of in   uential spreaders in complex networks. physical
review e 90 (3), 032812   .

bando, s. y., silva, f. n., costa, l. da f., silva, a. v., pimentel-
silva, l. r., castro, l. h., wen, h.-t., amaro, jr, e., moreira-
filho, c. a., 2013. complex network analysis of ca3 transcriptome
reveals pathogenic and compensatory pathways in refractory tem-
poral lobe epilepsy. plos one 8 (11), e79913.

barabasi, a.-l., albert, r., 1999. emergence of scaling in random

networks. science 286 (5439), 509   512.

bell, g., hey, t., szalay, a., 2009. beyond the data deluge. science

323 (5919), 1297   1298.

blei, d. m., ng, a. y., jordan, m. i., 2003. latent dirichlet alloca-

tion. the journal of machine learning research 3, 993   1022

blondel, v. d., guillaume, j.-l., lambiotte, r., lefebvre, e., 2008.
fast unfolding of communities in large networks. journal of sta-
tistical mechanics: theory and experiment 2008 (10), p10008.

b  orner, k., klavans, r., patek, m., zoss, a. m., biberstine, j. r.,
light, r. p., lariviere, v., boyack, k. w., 2012. design and up-
date of a classi   cation system: the ucsd map of science. plos
one 7 (7).

b  orner, k., scharnhorst, a., 2009. visual conceptualizations and

models of science. journal of informetrics 3 (3), 161   172.

boyack, k., klavans, r., borner, k., 2005. mapping the backbone

of science. scientometrics 64 (3), 351   374.

boyack, k. w., klavans, r., 2014. creation of a highly detailed,
dynamic, global model and map of science. journal of the associ-
ation for information science and technology 65 (4), 670   685.

boyack, k. w., newman, d., duhon, r. j., klavans, r., patek, m.,
biberstine, j. r., schijvenaars, b., skupin, a., ma, n., b  orner,
k., 2011. id91 more than two million biomedical publica-
tions: comparing the accuracies of nine text-based similarity ap-
proaches. plos one 6 (3), e18029

boyack, k. w., wylie, b. n., davidson, g. s., 2002. domain visual-
ization using vxinsight (r) for science and technology management.
journal of the association for information science and technology
53 (9), 764   774.

carretero-campos, c., bernaola-galv  an, p., coronado, a., carpena,
p., 2013. improving statistical keyword detection in short texts:
entropic and id91 approaches. physica a: statistical me-
chanics and its applications 392 (6), 1481     1492.

13

chen, c., 2004. searching for intellectual turning points: progres-
sive knowledge domain visualization. proceedings of the national
academy of sciences 101 (suppl 1), 5303   5310

chen, c., hicks, d., 2004. tracing knowledge di   usion. scientomet-

rics 59 (2), 199   211.

chen, t. t., 2012. the development and empirical study of a liter-

ature review aiding system. scientometrics 92 (1), 105   116.

ciotti, v., bonaventura, m., nicosia, v., panzarasa, p., latora, v.,
2016. homophily and missing links in id191. epj data
science 5 (1).

costa, l. da f., cesar, jr, r. m., 2009. shape classi   cation and
analysis: theory and practice, second edition edition. vol. 10 of
image processing series. crc press.

costa, l. da f., oliveira jr., o. n., travieso, g., rodrigues, f. a.,
villas boas, p. r., antiqueira, l., viana, m. p., rocha, l. e. c.,
2011. analyzing and modeling real-world phenomena with com-
plex networks: a survey of applications. advances in physics
60 (3), 329   412.

costa, l. da f., silva, f. n., 2006. hierarchical characterization of

complex networks. journal of statistical physics 125, 845   876.

craddock, t., harwood, c. r., hallinan, j., wipat, a., 2008. e-
science: relieving bottlenecks in large-scale genome analyses. na-
ture reviews microbiology 6 (12), 948   954.

daqing, l., kosmidis, k., bunde, a., havlin, s., 2011. dimension of

spatially embedded networks. nature physics 7 (6), 481   484.

ding, y., yan, e., frazho, a., caverlee, j., 2009. id95 for rank-
ing authors in co-id191. journal of the association for
information science and technology 60 (11), 2229   2243.

donner, r. v., zou, y., donges, j. f., marwan, n., kurths, j., 2010.
recurrence networks   a novel paradigm for nonlinear time series
analysis. new journal of physics 12 (3), 033025.

donovan, s., 2008. big data: teaching must evolve to keep up with

advances. nature 455 (7212), 461   461.

duda, r. o., hart, p. e., stork, d. g., 2001. pattern classi   cation.

john wiley and sons.

dunne, j. a., williams, r. j., martinez, n. d., 2002. food-web
structure and id177: the role of connectance and size.
proceedings of the national academy of sciences 99 (20), 12917   
12922.

erkan, g., radev, d. r., 2004. lexrank: graph-based lexical cen-
trality as salience in text summarization. journal of arti   cial in-
telligence research 22, 457   479.

fortunato, s., 2010. community detection in graphs. physics re-

ports 486 (3   5), 75   174.

fruchterman, t., reingold, e., 1991. graph drawing by force-
directed placement. software-practice & experience 21, 1129   
1164.

gri   ths, t. l., steyvers, m., 2004. finding scienti   c topics. proceed-
ings of the national academy of sciences 101 (suppl 1), 5228   5235
hulth, a., 2003. improved automatic keyword extraction given more
linguistic knowledge. in: collins, m., steedman, m. (eds.), pro-
ceedings of the 2003 conference on empirical methods in natu-
ral language processing. pp. 216   223, conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing, sapporo, japan, jul
11-12, 2003.

jenssen, t.-k., l  greid, a., komorowski, j., hovig, e., 2001. a
literature network of human genes for high-throughput analysis of
gene expression. nature genetics 28 (1), 21   28.

kedzie, c., mckeown, k., diaz, f., 2015. predicting salient updates
for disaster summarization. in: proceedings of the 53rd annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics and the
7th international joint conference on natural language process-
ing of the asian federation of natural language processing, acl
2015, july 26-31, 2015, beijing, china, volume 1: long papers.
pp. 1608   1617.

lacasa, l., luque, b., ballesteros, f., luque, j., nu  no, j. c., 2008.
from time series to complex networks: the visibility graph. pro-
ceedings of the national academy of sciences 105 (13), 4972   4975.
laporte, g., 1992. the vehicle routing problem: an overview of ex-
act and approximate algorithms. european journal of operational
research 59 (3), 345   358.

lariviere, v., haustein, s., b  orner, k., 2015. long-distance interdis-

ciplinarity leads to higher scienti   c impact. plos one 10 (3).

lawrence, s., giles, c. l., 1998. searching the world wide web. sci-

ence 280 (5360), 98   100.

leicht, e. a., clarkson, g., shedden, k., newman, m. e. j., 2007.
large-scale structure of time evolving id191. the eu-
ropean physical journal b 59 (1), 75   83.

levy, o., goldberg, y., 2014. neural id27 as implicit
id105. in: ghahramani, z., welling, m., cortes, c.,
lawrence, n. d., weinberger, k. q. (eds.), advances in neural
information processing systems 27. curran associates, inc., pp.
2177   2185.

leydesdor   , l., de moya-aneg  on, f., de nooy, w., 2015. aggregated
journal   journal citation relations in scopus and web of science
matched and compared in terms of networks, maps, and interac-
tive overlays. journal of the association for information science
and technology.

leydesdor   , l., rafols, i., 2009. a global map of science based on
the isi subject categories. journal of the american society for
information science and technology 60 (2), 348   362

leydesdor   , l., rafols, i., chen, c., 2013. interactive overlays of
journals and the measurement of interdisciplinarity on the basis
of aggregated journal   journal citations. journal of the american
society for information science and technology 64 (12), 2573   
2586.

li, j., zhou, j., luo, x., yang, z., 2012. chinese lexical networks:
the structure, function and formation. physica a: statistical me-
chanics and its applications 391 (21), 5254     5263.

manning, c. d., sch  utze, h., 1999. foundations of statistical natu-

ral language processing. mit press, cambridge, ma, usa.

mckeown, k., daume, h., chaturvedi, s., paparrizos, j., thadani,
k., barrio, p., biran, o., bothe, s., collins, m., fleischmann,
k. r., gravano, l., jha, r., king, b., mcinerney, k., moon,
t., neelakantan, a., o   seaghdha, d., radev, d., templeton, c.,
teufel, s., 2016. predicting the impact of scienti   c concepts us-
ing full-text features. journal of the association for information
science and technology.

menczer, f., 2004. correlated topologies in id191 and

the web. the european physical journal b 38 (2), 211   221.

mullen, e. k., daley, m., backx, a. g., thompson, g. j., 2014. gene
co-id191 associated with worker sterility in honey bees.
bmc systems biology 8 (38).

nenkova, a., mckeown, k., 2012. a survey of text summarization

techniques. in: mining text data. springer, pp. 43   76.

newman, m., 2010. networks: an introduction. oxford university

press, inc., new york, ny, usa.

newman, m. e. j., 2006. modularity and community structure
in networks. proceedings of the national academy of sciences
103 (23), 8577   8582.

newman, m. e. j., clauset, a., 2015. structure and id136 in

annotated networks. arxiv abs/1507.04001.

nichols, j., mahmud, j., drews, c., 2012. summarizing sporting

events using twitter. acm.

nykl, m., campr, m., je  zek, k., 2015. author ranking based on

personalized id95. journal of informetrics 9 (4), 777   799.

porter, a., rafols, i., 2009. is science becoming more interdisci-
plinary? measuring and mapping six research    elds over time.
scientometrics 81 (3), 719   745

radev, d. r., mckeown, k. r., 1998. generating natural language
summaries from multiple on-line sources. computational linguis-
tics 24 (3), 470   500 0891   2017.

rosvall, m., bergstrom, c. t., 2008. maps of id93 on com-
plex networks reveal community structure. proceedings of the na-
tional academy of sciences 105 (4), 1118   1123.

salton, g., buckley, c., 1988. term-weighting approaches in auto-
matic text retrieval. information processing & management 24 (5),
513   523.

santana, l., gonz  alez-d    az, h., quezada, e., uriarte, e., y  a  nez, m.,
vi  na, d., orallo, f., 2008. quantitative structureactivity relation-
ship and complex network approach to monoamine oxidase a and
b inhibitors. journal of medicinal chemistry 51 (21), 6740   6751.

14

schurig, d., mock, j. j., justice, b. j., cummer, s. a., pendry, j. b.,
starr, a. f., smith, d. r., 2006. metamaterial electromagnetic
cloak at microwave frequencies. science 314 (5801), 977   980.

sebastiani, f., 2002. machine learning in automated text categoriza-

tion. acm computing surveys 34 (1), 1   47.

shen, c., liu, f., weng, f., li, t., 2013. a participant-based ap-
proach for event summarization using twitter streams. in: pro-
ceedings of naacl. pp. 1152   1162.

silva, f. n., costa, l. da f., 2011. network 3d.

url
software&subpage=networks3d

http://cyvision.ifsc.usp.br/cyvision/?page=

silva, f. n., rodrigues, f. a., oliveira jr., o. n., costa, l. da f.,
2013. quantifying the interdisciplinarity of scienti   c journals and
   elds. journal of informetrics 7 (2), 469   477.

silva, f. n., traven  colo, b. a. n., viana, m. p., costa, l. da f.,
2010. identifying the borders of mathematical knowledge. journal
of physics a: mathematical and theoretical 43 (32), 325202.

silva, f. n., viana, m. p., traven  colo, b. a. n., costa, l. da f., 2011.
investigating relationships within and between category networks
in wikipedia. journal of informetrics 5 (3), 431     438.

silva, t. c., amancio, d. r., 2012. id51 via
high order of learning in complex networks. epl (europhysics
letters) 98 (5), 58001.

skupin, a., biberstine, j. r., b  orner, k., 2013. visualizing the top-
ical structure of the medical sciences: a self-organizing map ap-
proach. plos one 8 (3).

soric, j. c., chen, p. y., kerkho   , a., rainwater, d., melin, k., al`u,
a., 2013. demonstration of an ultralow pro   le cloak for scattering
suppression of a    nite-length rod in free space. new journal of
physics 15 (3), 033037.

stone, r., lavine, m., 2014. the social

life of robots. science

346 (6206), 178   179.

tang, j., meng, z., nguyen, x., mei, q., zhang, m., 2014. under-
standing the limiting factors of id96 via posterior con-
traction analysis. in: jebara, t., xing, e. p. (eds.), proceedings
of the 31st international conference on machine learning (icml-
14). jmlr workshop and conference proceedings, pp. 190   198.
traven  colo, b. a. n., viana, m. p., costa, l. da f., 2009. border
detection in complex networks. new journal of physics 11, 063019.
traven  colo, b., costa, l. da f., 2008. accessibility in complex net-

works. physics letters a 373 (1), 89   95.

  usdiken, b., pasadeos, y., 1995. organizational analysis in north
america and europe: a comparison of co-id191. orga-
nization studies 16 (3), 503   526

van eck, n. j., waltman, l., 2010. software survey: vosviewer,
a computer program for bibliometric mapping. scientometrics
84 (2), 523   538.

van eck, n. j., waltman, l., 2014. citnetexplorer: a new software
tool for analyzing and visualizing id191. journal of
informetrics 8 (4), 802   823

viana, m. p., travencolo, b. a. n., tanck, e., costa, l. da f., 2010.
characterizing topological and dynamical properties of complex
networks without border e   ects. physica a: statistical mechanics
and its applications 389 (8), 1771   1778.

waaijer, c. j. f., van bochove, c. a., van eck, n. j., 2011. on the
map: nature and science editorials. scientometrics 86 (1), 99   112.
yan, x., zhai, l., fan, w., 2013. c-index: a weighted network
node centrality measure for collaboration competence. journal of
informetrics 7 (1), 223   239

yang, h.-x., wang, w.-x., wu, z.-x., lai, y.-c., wang, b.-h., 2009.
diversity-optimized cooperation on complex networks. physics
review e 79, 056107.

zhao, w., chellappa, r., phillips, p. j., rosenfeld, a., 2003. face
recognition: a literature survey. acm computing surveys 35 (4),
399   458.

zhou, j., zeng, a., fan, y., di, z., 2015. ranking scienti   c pub-
lications with similarity-preferential mechanism. scientometrics
106 (2), 805   816.

