sort story: sorting jumbled images and captions into stories

harsh agrawal   ,1

arjun chandrasekaran   ,1,   

dhruv batra3,1

devi parikh3,1

mohit bansal4,2

1virginia tech 2tti-chicago 3georgia institute of technology 4unc chapel hill
{harsh92, carjun, dbatra, parikh}@vt.edu,
mbansal@cs.unc.edu

6
1
0
2

 

v
o
n
7

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

5
v
3
9
4
7
0

.

6
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

temporal common sense has applications in
ai tasks such as qa, multi-document summa-
rization, and human-ai communication. we
propose the task of sequencing     given a jum-
bled set of aligned image-caption pairs that
belong to a story, the task is to sort them
such that the output sequence forms a coher-
ent story. we present multiple approaches,
via unary (position) and pairwise (order) pre-
dictions, and their ensemble-based combina-
tions, achieving strong results on this task. we
use both text-based and image-based features,
which depict complementary improvements.
using qualitative examples, we demonstrate
that our models have learnt interesting aspects
of temporal common sense.

introduction

1
sequencing is a task for children that is aimed at im-
proving understanding of the temporal occurrence of
a sequence of events. the task is, given a jumbled
set of images (and maybe captions) that belong to
a single story, sort them into the correct order so
that they form a coherent story. our motivation in
this work is to enable ai systems to better under-
stand and predict the temporal nature of events in
the world. to this end, we train machine learning
models to perform the task of    sequencing   .

temporal reasoning has a number of applications
such as id57 of multiple
sources of, say, news information where the relative
order of events can be useful to accurately merge
information in a temporally consistent manner. in
id53 tasks (richardson et al., 2013;

   denotes equal contribution.
   part of this work was done during an internship at ttic.

figure 1: (a) the input is a jumbled set of aligned
image-caption pairs. (b) actual output of the system
    an ordered sequence of image-caption pairs that
form a coherent story.

fader et al., 2014; weston et al., 2015; ren et al.,
2015), answering questions related to when an event
occurs, or what events occurred prior to a particular
event require temporal reasoning. a good temporal
model of events in everyday life, i.e., a    temporal
common sense   , could also improve the quality of
communication between ai systems and humans.

stories are a form of narrative sequences that have
an inherent temporal common sense structure. we
propose the use of visual stories depicting personal
events to learn temporal common sense. we use
stories from the sequential image narrative dataset
(sind) (huang et al., 2016) in which a set of 5
aligned image-caption pairs together form a coher-
ent story. given an input story that is jumbled
(fig. 1(a)), we train machine learning models to sort
them into a coherent story (fig. 1(b)).1

1note that    jumbled    here refers to the loss of temporal or-

dering; image-caption pairs are still aligned.

our contributions are as follows:

    we propose the task of visual story sequencing.
    we implement two approaches to solve the task:
one based on individual story elements to predict
position, and the other based on pairwise story ele-
ments to predict relative order of story elements. we
also combine these approaches in a voting scheme
that outperforms the individual methods.
    as features, we represent a story element as both
text-based features from the caption and image-
based features, and show that they provide comple-
mentary improvements. for text-based features, we
use both sentence context and relative order based
distributed representations.
    we show qualitative examples of our models learn-
ing temporal common sense.

2 related work

temporal ordering has a rich history in nlp re-
search. scripts (schank and abelson, 2013), and
more recently, narrative chains (chambers and ju-
rafsky, 2008) contain information about the partic-
ipants and causal relationships between events that
enable the understanding of stories. a number of
works
(mani and schiffman, 2005; mani et al.,
2006; boguraev and ando, 2005) learn temporal re-
lations and properties of news events from the dense,
expert-annotated timebank corpus (pustejovsky et
al., 2003).
in our work, however, we use multi-
modal story data that has no temporal annotations.

a number of works also reason about temporal
ordering by using manually de   ned linguistic cues
(webber, 1988; passonneau, 1988; lapata and las-
carides, 2006; hitzeman et al., 1995; kehler, 2000).
our approach uses neural networks to avoid feature
design for learning temporal ordering.

recent works (modi and titov, 2014; modi,
2016) learn distributed representations for predi-
cates in a sentence for the tasks of event ordering and
cloze evaluation. unlike their work, our approach
makes use of multi-modal data with free-form nat-
ural language text to learn event embeddings. fur-
ther, our models are trained end-to-end while their
pipelined approach involves parsing and extracting
verb frames from each sentence, where errors may
propagate from one module to the next (as discussed
in section 4.3).

chen et al. (2009) use a generalized mallows
model for modeling sequences for coherence within
single documents. their approach may also be ap-
plicable to our task. recently, mostafazadeh et al.
(2016) presented the    rocstories    dataset of 5-
sentence stories with stereotypical causal and tem-
poral relations between events. in our work though,
we make use of a multi-modal story-dataset that con-
tains both images and associated story-like captions.
some works in vision (pickup et al., 2014; basha
et al., 2012) also temporally order images; typically
by    nding correspondences between multiple im-
ages of the same scene using geometry-based ap-
proaches. similarly, choi et al. (2016) compose a
story out of multiple short video clips. they de   ne
metrics based on scene dynamics and coherence,
and use dense optical    ow and patch-matching. in
contrast, our work deals with stories containing po-
tentially visually dissimilar but semantically coher-
ent set of images and captions.

a few other recent works (kim et al., 2015; kim
et al., 2014; kim and xing, 2014; sigurdsson et al.,
2016; bosselut et al., 2016; wang et al., 2016) sum-
marize hundreds of individual streams of informa-
tion (images, text, videos) from the web that deal
with a single concept or event, to learn a common
theme or storyline or for timeline summarization.
our task, however, is to predict the correct sorting
of a given story, which is different from summa-
rization or retrieval. ramanathan et al. (2015) at-
tempt to learn temporal embeddings of video frames
in complex events. while their motivation is similar
to ours, they deal with sampled frames from a video
while we attempt to learn temporal common sense
from multi-modal stories consisting of a sequence
of aligned image-caption pairs.
3 approach
in this section, we    rst describe the two components
in our approach: unary scores that do not use con-
text, and pairwise scores that encode relative order-
ings of elements. next, we describe how we com-
bine these scores through a voting scheme.

3.1 unary models
let          n denote a permutation of n elements
(image-caption pairs). we use   i to denote the posi-
tion of element i in the permutation   . a unary score

n(cid:88)

su(  ) captures the appropriateness of each story el-
ement i in position   i:

su(  ) =

p (  i|i)

(1)

i=1

that uses

unary model

where p (  i|i) denotes the id203 of the ele-
ment i being present in position   i, which is the
output from an n-way softmax layer in a deep
neural network. we experiment with 2 networks    
(skip-
(1) a language-alone
a gated recurrent
thought+mlp)
unit (gru) proposed by cho et al. (2014) to embed
a caption into a vector space. we use the skip-
thought (kiros et al., 2015) gru, which is trained
on the bookcorpus (zhu et al., 2015) to predict the
context (preceding and following sentences) of a
given sentence. these embeddings are fed as input
into a multi-layer id88 (mlp).
(skip-
(2) a language+vision
thought+id98+mlp)
that embeds the caption
as above and embeds the image via a convolutional
neural network (id98). we use the activations
from the penultimate layer of the 19-layer vgg-
net (simonyan and zisserman, 2014), which have
been shown to generalize well. both embeddings
are concatenated and fed as input to an mlp.

unary model

in

the

both
story

best
(optimal

cases,
elements

ordering
of
the
permutation)
      = arg max       n su(  ) can be found ef   -
ciently in o(n3) time with the hungarian algo-
rithm (munkres, 1957). since these unary scores
are not in   uenced by other elements in the story,
they capture the semantics and linguistic structures
associated with speci   c positions of stories e.g., the
beginning, the middle, and the end.

3.2 pairwise models
similar to learning to rank approaches (hang, 2011),
we develop pairwise scoring models that given a pair
of elements (i, j), learn to assign a score:
s([[  i <   j]] | i, j) indicating whether element i
should be placed before element j in the permutation
  . here, [[  ]] indicates the iverson bracket (which is
1 if the input argument is true and 0 otherwise). we
develop and experiment with the following 3 pair-
wise models:
(1) a language-alone pairwise model

(skip-

thought+mlp) that takes as input a pair of skip-
thought embeddings and trains an mlp (with
| i, j), the
hinge-loss) that outputs s([[  i <   j]]
score for placing i before j.
(2) a language+vision pairwise model
(skip-
thought+id98+mlp) that concatenates the skip-
thought and id98 embeddings for i and j and trains
a similar mlp as above.
(3) a language-alone neural position embedding
(npe) model. instead of using frozen skip-thought
embeddings, we learn a task-aware ordered dis-
tributed embedding for sentences.
speci   cally,
each sentence in the story is embedded x =
(x1, . . . , xn), xi     rd
+, via an lstm (hochreiter
and schmidhuber, 1997) with relu non-linearities.
similar to the max-margin loss that is applied to neg-
ative examples by vendrov et al. (2016), we use an
asymmetric penalty that encourages sentences ap-
pearing early in the story to be placed closer to the
origin than sentences appearing later in the story.

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13) max(0,        (xj     xi))
(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2
(cid:88)

lij

lij =

loss =

(2)

1<=i<j=n
at train time,
the parameters of the lstm are
learned end-to-end to minimize this asymmetric or-
dered loss (as measured over the gold-standard se-
quences). at test time, we use s([[  i <   j]] | i, j) =
lij. thus, as we move away from the origin in the
embedding space, we traverse through the sentences
in a story. each of these three pairwise approaches
assigns a score s(  i,   j|i, j) to an ordered pair of
elements (i,j), which is used to construct a pairwise
(cid:111)
scoring model:

s([[  i <   j]])     s([[  j <   i]])

(cid:88)

sp(  ) =

(cid:110)

,

1<=i<j<=n

(3)
by summing over the scores for all possible ordered
pairs in the permutation. this pairwise score cap-
tures local contextual information in stories. find-
ing the best permutation       = arg max       n sp(  )
under this pairwise model is np-hard so approxi-
mations will be required.
in our experiments, we
study short sequences (n = 5), where the space of
permutations is easily enumerable (5! = 120). for
longer sequences, we can utilize integer program-
ming methods or well-studied spectral relaxations
for this problem.

3.3 voting-based ensemble
to combine the complementary information cap-
tured by the unary (su) and pairwise models (sp),
we use a voting-based ensemble. for each method
in the ensemble, we    nd the top three permuta-
tions. each of these permutations (  k) then vote
for a particular element to be placed at a particu-
cur at jth position, i.e. vij = (cid:80)
lar position. let v be a vote matrix such that vij
stores the number of votes for ith element to oc-
i == j]]).
(cid:80)n
we use the hungarian algorithm to    nd the optimal
permutation that maximizes the votes assigned, i.e.
j=1 vij    [[  i == j]].
     
vote = arg max       n
we experimented with a number of model voting
combinations and found the combination of pairwise
skip-thought+id98+mlp and neural position em-
beddings to work best (based on a validation set).

(cid:80)n

k[[  k

i=1

4 experiments

4.1 data
we train and evaluate our model on personal multi-
modal stories from the sind (sequential image
narrative dataset) (huang et al., 2016), where each
story is a sequence of 5 images and corresponding
story-like captions. the narrative captions in this
dataset, e.g.,    friends having a good time    (as op-
posed to    people sitting next to each other   ) capture
a sequential, conversational language, which is char-
acteristic of stories. we use 40,155 stories for train-
ing, 4990 for validation and 5055 stories for testing.

4.2 metrics
we evaluate the performance of our model at cor-
rectly ordering a jumbled set of story elements using
the following 3 metrics:
spearman   s rank correlation (sp.)
(spearman,
1904) measures if the ranking of story elements in
the predicted and ground truth orders are monotoni-
cally related (higher is better).
pairwise accuracy (pairw.) measures the fraction
of pairs of elements whose predicted relative order-
ing is the same as the ground truth order (higher is
better).
average distance (dist.) measures the average
change in position of all elements in the predicted

method
random order
unary

pairwise

pairwise order npe
voting

features

sp. pairw. dist.
0.000 0.500 1.601
skipthought
0.508 0.718 1.373
skipthought + image 0.532 0.729 1.352
skipthought
0.546 0.732 0.923
skipthought + image 0.565 0.740 0.897
0.480 0.704 1.010
skipthought + image 0.675 0.799 0.724
(pairwise) + npe

table 1: performance of our different models and
features at the sequencing task.

story from their respective positions in the ground
truth story (lower is better).

4.3 results
pairwise models vs unary models as shown in
table 1, the pairwise models based on skip-thought
features outperform the unary models in our task.
however, the pairwise order model performs worse
than the unary skip-thought model, suggesting that
the skip-thought features, which encode context of
a sentence, also provide a crucial signal for temporal
ordering of story sentences.

contribution of image features augmenting the
text features with image features results in a visible
performance improvement of both the model trained
with unary features and the model trained with pair-
wise features. while image features by themselves
result in poor performance on this task, they seem to
capture temporal information that is complementary
to the text features.

ensemble voting to exploit the fact that unary
and pairwise models, as well as text and image fea-
tures, capture different aspects of the story, we com-
bine them using a voting ensemble. based on the
validation set, we found that combining the pair-
wise order model and the pairwise model with both
skip-thought and image (id98) features performs
the best. this voting based method achieves the
best performance on all three metrics. this shows
that our different approaches indeed capture comple-
mentary information regarding feasible orderings of
caption-image pairs to form a coherent story.

for comparison to existing related work, we tried

(a) first position

(b) second position

(c) third position

(d) fourth position

(e) fifth position

figure 2: word cloud corresponding to most discriminative words for each position.

to duplicate the pipelined approach of modi and
titov (2014). for this, we    rst parse our story
sentences to extract svo (subject, verb, object) tu-
ples (using the stanford parser (chen and manning,
2014)). however, this step succeeds for only 60%
of our test data. now even if we consider a perfect
downstream algorithm that always makes the cor-
rect position prediction given svo tuples, the over-
all performance is still a spearman correlation of
just 0.473, i.e., the upper bound performance of this
pipelined approach is lower than the performance
of our text-only end-to-end model (correlation of
0.546) in table 1.

4.4 qualitative analysis
visualizations of position predictions from our
model demonstrate that it has learnt the three act
structure (trottier, 1998) in stories     the setup, the
middle and the climax. we also present success and
failure examples of our sorting model   s predictions.
see the supplementary for more details and    gures.
we visualize our model   s temporal common
sense, in fig. 2. the word clouds show discrim-
inative words     the words that the model believes
are indicative of sentence positions in a story. the
size of a word is proportional to the ratio of its fre-
quency of occurring in that position to other po-
sitions. some words like    party   ,    wedding   , etc.,
probably because our model believes that the start
the story describes the setup     the occasion or event.
people often tend to describe meeting friends or
family members which probably results in the dis-
criminative words such as    people   ,    friend   ,    every-
one    in the second and the third sentences. more-

over, the model believes that people tend to conclude
the stories using words like       nally   ,    afterwards   ,
tend to talk about    great day   , group    pictures    with
everyone, etc.

5 conclusion
we propose the task of    sequencing    in a set of
image-caption pairs, with the motivation of learn-
ing temporal common sense. we implement multi-
ple neural network models based on individual and
pairwise element-based predictions (and their en-
semble), and utilize both image and text features,
to achieve strong performance on the task. our
best system, on average, predicts the ordering of
sentences to within a distance error of 0.8 (out of
5) positions. we also analyze our predictions and
show qualitative examples that demonstrate tempo-
ral common sense.

acknowledgements
we thank ramakrishna vedantam and the anony-
mous reviewers for their helpful suggestions. this
work was supported by: nsf career awards to
db and dp, aro yip awards to db and dp, ic-
tas junior faculty awards to db and dp, google
faculty research award to dp and db, arl grant
w911nf-15-2-0080 to dp and db, onr grant
n00014-14-1-0679 to db and n00014-16-1-2713 to
dp, onr yip award to dp, paul g. allen family
foundation allen distinguished investigator award
to dp, alfred p. sloan fellowship to dp, aws in
education research grant to db, nvidia gpu do-
nations to db and mb, an ibm faculty award and
bloomberg data science research grant to mb.

appendix

a confusion matrix for predicting

position of an element

we visualize the 5-way classi   cation confusion ma-
trix for our best performing method i.e., voting en-
semble of pairwise skip-thought+image(id98) and
pairwise order (neural position embedding (npe))
in fig. 3. the block-diagonal matrix structure shows
that the model predicts the    rst and the last element
of a story reasonably well but is often confused by
elements in the middle of the story. this visualiza-
tion suggests that the model has learnt the three act
structure in stories, i.e., the setup, the middle and the
climax.

b predicted stories

we present qualitative examples of story orders pre-
dicted by the best performing model in fig. 4.
fig. 4a shows example stories in which the position
of all elements are predicted correctly. fig. 4b shows
stories in which none of the positions are predicted
correctly by our model. these two examples show
that our model clearly fails when there is no inher-
ent temporal order in the story either via language or
images.

c temporal common sense

in the word cloud in fig. 5, we visualize the words
that the model    nds discriminative in correct pre-
dictions. these are words from correctly predicted
stories that the model believes are indicative of sen-
tence positions in a story. the size of a word is pro-
portional to the ratio of its frequency of occurring
in that position to other positions. our model cap-
tures events such as    carnival   ,    reunion   , and sports
topics like    baseball   ,    soccer   ,    skate    in the    rst po-
sition. this could be the case because the    rst sen-
tence of a story usually introduces the event that the
story is based on. in fig. 5e (word-cloud of the last
sentence), we also observe that the model correctly
learns cue-words such as    overall   , and    lastly   . it
also learns words and events that frequently con-
clude stories such as    returned   ,    tired   ,    winning   ,
   winner   , and    celebration   .

figure 3: confusion matrix for predictions from the
best performing model i.e voting ensemble of pair-
wise skip-thought+image(id98) and pairwise or-
der neural position embedding (npe).

references
[basha et al.2012] tali basha, yael moses, and shai avi-

dan. 2012. photo sequencing. in eccv. 2

[boguraev and ando2005] branimir

rie kubota ando.
analysis for temporal reasoning. in ijcai. 2

and
2005. timeml-compliant text

boguraev

[bosselut et al.2016] antoine bosselut,

jianfu chen,
david warren, hannaneh hajishirzi, and yejin choi.
2016.
learning prototypical event structure from
photo albums. in acl. 2

[chambers and jurafsky2008] nathanael chambers and
daniel jurafsky. 2008. unsupervised learning of nar-
rative event chains. in acl. citeseer. 2

[chen and manning2014] danqi chen and christopher d
2014. a fast and accurate dependency

manning.
parser using neural networks. in emnlp. 4

[chen et al.2009] harr chen, srk branavan, regina
barzilay, david r karger, et al. 2009. content mod-
eling using latent permutations. journal of arti   cial
intelligence research.

[cho et al.2014] kyunghyun cho, bart van merri  enboer,
caglar gulcehre, dzmitry bahdanau, fethi bougares,
holger schwenk, and yoshua bengio. 2014. learning
phrase representations using id56 encoder-decoder for
id151. in emnlp.

[choi et al.2016] jinsoo choi, tae-hyun oh,

and
in so kweon. 2016. video-story composition via plot
analysis. in cvpr.

[fader et al.2014] anthony fader, luke zettlemoyer, and
oren etzioni. 2014. open id53 over
in acm
curated and extracted knowledge bases.
sigkdd. 1

(a) examples of stories for which the temporal sequence of elements was predicted perfectly.

(b) examples of stories for which the model failed to predict the correct position of any story element. the
elements (images and captions) in a story are generic, with no clear temporal ordering. the stories seem
to lack a coherent narrative.

figure 4: examples of success and failure cases of temporal order prediction of story elements by our best
performing model.

(a) first position

(b) second position

(c) third position

(d) fourth position

(e) fifth position

figure 5: discriminative words in each position of all correctly predicted stories.

[hang2011] li hang.

learning to rank.
mation and systems. 3

2011. a short introduction to
ieice transactions on infor-

[hitzeman et al.1995] janet hitzeman, marc moens, and
claire grover. 1995. algorithms for analysing the
temporal structure of discourse. in eacl. 2

[hochreiter and schmidhuber1997] sepp hochreiter and
j  urgen schmidhuber. 1997. long short-term memory.
neural computation. 3

[huang et al.2016] ting-hao (kenneth) huang, fran-
cis ferraro, nasrin mostafazadeh,
ishan mishra,
aishwarya agrawal, jacob devlin, ross girshick,
xiaodong he, pushmeet kohli, dhruv batra,
c. lawrence zitnick, devi parikh, lucy vander-
wende, michel galley, and margaret mitchell. 2016.
visual storytelling. in naacl. 1, 4

[kehler2000] andrew kehler. 2000. coherence and the

resolution of ellipsis. linguistics and philosophy. 2

[kim and xing2014] gunhee kim and eric xing. 2014.
reconstructing storyline graphs for image recommen-
dation from web community photos. in cvpr. 2

[kim et al.2014] gunhee kim, leonid sigal, and eric
xing. 2014. joint summarization of large-scale col-
lections of web images and videos for storyline recon-
struction. in cvpr. 2

[kim et al.2015] gunhee kim, seungwhan moon, and
leonid sigal. 2015. joint photo stream and blog post
summarization and exploration. in cvpr. 2

[kiros et al.2015] ryan kiros, yukun zhu, ruslan r
salakhutdinov, richard zemel, raquel urtasun, an-
tonio torralba, and sanja fidler. 2015. skip-thought
vectors. in nips. 3

[lapata and lascarides2006] mirella lapata and alex
lascarides. 2006. learning sentence-internal tem-

poral relations. journal of arti   cial intelligence re-
search. 2

[mani and schiffman2005] inderjeet mani and barry
schiffman. 2005. temporally anchoring and order-
ing events in news. time and event recognition in
natural language. john benjamins. 2

[mani et al.2006] inderjeet mani, marc verhagen, ben
wellner, chong min lee, and james pustejovsky.
2006. machine learning of temporal relations.
in
coling-acl. 2

[modi and titov2014] ashutosh modi and ivan titov.
2014. inducing neural models of script knowledge. in
conll. 2

[modi2016] ashutosh modi. 2016. event embeddings

for semantic script modeling. in conll. 2

[mostafazadeh et al.2016] nasrin

mostafazadeh,
nathanael chambers, xiaodong he, devi parikh,
dhruv batra, lucy vanderwende, pushmeet kohli,
and james allen. 2016. a corpus and cloze evaluation
for deeper understanding of commonsense stories. in
naacl.

[munkres1957] james munkres. 1957. algorithms for
the assignment and transportation problems. journal
of the society for industrial and applied mathematics.
3

[passonneau1988] rebecca j passonneau. 1988. a com-
putational model of the semantics of tense and aspect.
computational linguistics. 2

[pickup et al.2014] lyndsey pickup, zheng pan, donglai
wei, yichang shih, changshui zhang, andrew zis-
serman, bernhard scholkopf, and william freeman.
2014. seeing the arrow of time. in cvpr. 2
pustejovsky,

patrick
hanks, roser sauri, andrew see, robert gaizauskas,

[pustejovsky et al.2003] james

andrea setzer, dragomir radev, beth sundheim,
david day, lisa ferro, et al. 2003. the timebank
corpus. in corpus linguistics. 2

[ramanathan et al.2015] vignesh ramanathan, kevin
tang, greg mori, and li fei-fei. 2015. learning
temporal embeddings for complex video analysis. in
cvpr.

[ren et al.2015] mengye ren, ryan kiros, and richard
zemel. 2015. exploring models and data for image
id53. in nips. 1

[richardson et al.2013] matthew richardson, christo-
pher jc burges, and erin renshaw. 2013. mctest: a
challenge dataset for the open-domain machine com-
prehension of text. in emnlp. 1

[schank and abelson2013] roger c schank and robert p
abelson. 2013. scripts, plans, goals, and under-
standing: an inquiry into human knowledge struc-
tures. psychology press. 2

[sigurdsson et al.2016] gunnar a sigurdsson, xinlei
chen, and abhinav gupta. 2016. learning visual
storylines with skipping recurrent neural networks. in
eccv. 2

[simonyan and zisserman2014] karen simonyan

and
andrew zisserman. 2014. very deep convolutional
arxiv
networks for large-scale image recognition.
preprint arxiv:1409.1556. 3

[spearman1904] charles spearman. 1904. the proof and
measurement of association between two things. the
american journal of psychology. 4

[trottier1998] david trottier. 1998. the screenwriter   s
bible: a complete guide to writing, formatting, and
selling your script. silman-james press. 5

[vendrov et al.2016] ivan vendrov, ryan kiros, sanja fi-
dler, and raquel urtasun. 2016. order-embeddings of
images and language. in iclr.

[wang et al.2016] william yang wang, yashar mehdad,
dragomir r radev, and amanda stent. 2016. a low-
rank approximation approach to learning joint embed-
dings of news stories and images for timeline summa-
rization. in naacl. 2

[webber1988] bonnie lynn webber. 1988. tense as dis-

course anaphor. computational linguistics. 2

[weston et al.2015] jason weston, antoine bordes, sumit
chopra, and tomas mikolov. 2015. towards ai-
complete id53: a set of prerequisite toy
tasks. arxiv preprint arxiv:1502.05698. 1

[zhu et al.2015] yukun zhu, ryan kiros, rich zemel,
ruslan salakhutdinov, raquel urtasun, antonio tor-
ralba, and sanja fidler. 2015. aligning books and
movies: towards story-like visual explanations by
watching movies and reading books. in cvpr. 3

