1
1
0
2

 

g
u
a
2
2

 

 
 
]

y
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
6
3
4

.

8
0
1
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

the relationship between acquaintanceship and
coauthorship in scienti   c collaboration networks1

center for astrophysics & institute for quantitative social science, harvard university

alberto pepe

abstract

this article examines the relationship between acquaintanceship and coau-
thorship patterns in a multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional, geographically
distributed research center. two social networks are constructed and com-
pared: a network of coauthorship, representing how researchers write articles
with one another, and a network of acquaintanceship, representing how those
researchers know each other on a personal level, based on their responses to
an online survey. statistical analyses of the topology and community struc-
ture of these networks point to the importance of small-scale, local, personal
networks predicated upon acquaintanceship for accomplishing collaborative
work in scienti   c communities.

keywords: scienti   c collaboration networks, scienti   c communities,
coauthorship, acquaintanceship, community structure, survey research.

1. introduction

numerous way to study scienti   c collaboration exist. scholarly coauthor-
ship   the joint publication of scholarly articles   is a widely used indicator of
collaboration in scienti   c circles. in specialized literature, coauthorship net-
works have been employed to study collaboration patterns within entire scien-
ti   c domains, e.g., neuroscience (braun et al., 2001), biomedicine (newman,
2004), and nanoscience (schummer, 2004), as well as within more specialized
scienti   c circles, e.g., the communities of researchers involved in information
visualization (b  orner et al., 2005), genetic programming (tomassini et al.,
2007), and environmental wireless sensing (pepe and rodriguez, 2010).

1this is a preprint. published version can be found at doi: 10.1002/asi.21629.

preprint submitted to jasist

november 3, 2018

besides coauthorship, studies of scienti   c collaboration have also cov-
ered the importance of acquaintanceship for scienti   c communication, labor
management and coordination. studies of this kind employ ethnographic
methods such as direct interviews, participant observations of meetings, and
sociometric surveys to explore the role of personal networks in modeling
scienti   c advancement. early studies of acquaintanceship in science have
analyzed the impact of task-based work   ows (kraut et al., 1987), face-to-
face communication (lievrouw et al., 1987), and scienti   c meetings (liber-
man and wolf, 1997) on the structure of interpersonal ties and knowledge
   ows among scientists in various scienti   c domains. more recently, scienti   c
acquaintanceship studies have touched upon emerging cyber-infrastructure
initiatives, by exploring the role of formal and informal personal knowledge
exchange in the context of    virtual science    laboratories (chin et al., 2002)
and multi-institutional interdisciplinary research centers (hara et al., 2003).
while the literature covers many aspects of both coauthorship and ac-
quaintanceship in the context of scienti   c communities, rarely has their re-
lationship been examined in detail. this is because collecting data about
acquaintanceship and related social traces is a time-consuming, elaborate
and error-prone procedure, especially for large scienti   c communities. out-
side of science, with growing availability of online corpora containing social
indicators, it is possible to employ large datasets harvested from the web to
infer acquaintanceship ties. personal connections as variegated as business,
friendship and romantic connections are increasingly becoming available on-
line and are being used for large-scale social network analyses. examples
include: a comparison of online and o   ine friendship ties (tong et al., 2008),
an analysis of acquaintanceship ties and geographic coincidence (crandall
et al., 2010), and the structural and temporal evolution of a dating website
community (holme, 2004). but a similar online footprint of acquaintanceship
ties is not available for most scienti   c communities.

for this reason, coauthorship networks are sometimes used as proxies for
acquaintanceship networks. for example, in who is the best connected sci-
entist? (newman, 2004), newman constructs a coauthorship network and
employs it as an acquaintanceship network, assuming that    it is probably
fair to say that most people who have written a paper together are gen-
uinely acquainted with one another    (newman, 2004, p. 339).
is this a
reasonable assumption? understanding the relationship that exists between
coauthors and acquaintances is important not only to elucidate the social
component that exists at the basis of modern scienti   c collaborations, but

2

also to measure the extent by which scholarly coauthorship networks can be
used as surrogates for social networks. in traditional research settings, it was
very likely that coauthors of a scholarly article were acquainted with each
other at a personal level. but in recent times, scienti   c research is increas-
ingly being conducted in centers which can be extremely large, variegated in
their disciplinary component, and geographically distributed over di   erent
cities, countries and continents. for example, many ongoing collaborations
in physics and astrophysics are so large that some publications include hun-
dreds of authors. for these articles, it is virtually impossible to discern the
nature and extent of individual contributions to research, let alone derive
acquaintanceship patterns (solomon, 2009). similarly, many modern cyber-
infrastructure enterprises, in the form of collaboratories and e-science centers,
are so variegated in their disciplinary and geographical con   guration that
their researchers rely predominantly upon computer supported technologies
for their communication, collaboration and organization (olson and olson,
2000; bos et al., 2007; finholt, 2002). how are coauthorship and acquain-
tanceship patterns related to each other in such emerging scienti   c settings?
this article addresses this question by a comparative network analysis of
collaboration in a distributed, multi-disciplinary research environment.

2. study, data and instruments

2.1. motivation and research questions

the scienti   c community analyzed here is pivoted around the center
for embedded networked sensing (cens), a national science foundation
science and technology center established in 2002, involved in the devel-
opment and application of sensor network systems to critical scienti   c and
societal pursuits. cens features many of the characteristics of modern    col-
laboratories   : it is multi-institutional, multi-disciplinary, and geographically
distributed.
it includes    ve member universities in california: university
of california, los angeles, university of southern california, university of
california, riverside, california institute of technology, and university of
california, merced. it includes 300 faculty, students, and sta    specialized
in disparate academic disciplines, ranging from computer science to biology
and environmental science, with additional partners in arts, architecture,
and public health. the type of research conducted at cens spans a wide
spectrum of disciplines and applications requiring continuous cooperation
among individuals who, otherwise, would probably not interact beyond the

3

walls of traditional university departments and faculties. cens features a
headquarter base located at ucla, yet cens-related work is conducted in
departments, labs, and remote    eld locations situated near all    ve mem-
ber institutions as well as at partner institutions in the u.s. and abroad.
these institutions (and sometimes even departments) are su   ciently distant
from one another to prevent continuous physical interactions among scien-
tists: computer-supported communication is at the basis of their collabora-
tive work.

this variegated institutional, disciplinary, and geographical arrangement
makes cens a convenient environment to investigate scienti   c collaboration
in modern research settings. two manifestations of collaboration among
cens researchers are investigated. the    rst is coauthorship, de   ned as the
joint authoring of scholarly artifacts. in a coauthorship network, two individ-
uals are linked to one another if they are coauthors. the second manifestation
is acquaintanceship, de   ned as a relationship of personal knowledge charac-
terized by mutual face and name recognition. in an acquaintanceship net-
work, two individuals are linked if they indicate to recognize and know each
other at a personal level. these two networks are analyzed and compared. to
begin with, it is interesting to explore the overarching statistical properties
of the networks of acquaintanceship and coauthorship to understand whether
they di   er in a systematic way. do they have a similar con   guration? the
   rst portion of this research is aimed at exploring the mechanisms by which
cens researchers write papers and make acquaintances with one another.
it can be summarized as follows:

rq1. what is the topology of the coauthorship and acquain-
tanceship networks in distributed, multi-disciplinary research en-
vironments? what is the procedure by which researchers form
ties with their coauthors and acquaintances?

the second portion of this study presents a comparative analysis of the
coauthorship and acquaintanceship networks. it is clear that in collabora-
tories like cens, computer supported technologies are enabling new modes
of science, scienti   c advancement and collaboration. yet, we still have to
fully understand how these emerging forms of remote collaboration function
in the absence of interpersonal knowledge and contact, or similarly, when
such contact is predominantly mediated via digital networks.
it has been
recently noted, for example, that physical distance between researchers that

4

work across organization boundaries is the most likely factor to hinder sci-
enti   c collaboration and coordination (cummings and kiesler, 2005). what
is the proportion of cens researchers that produce joint scholarly work but
have never met each other in person? in this part of the study, a compar-
ative network analysis is conducted to understand how well communities of
coauthors and acquaintances are representative of one another. with these
notions in mind, the second guiding question can be summarized as follows:

rq2. is coauthorship a suitable proxy for acquaintanceship in
multi-institutional, distributed, scienti   c communities? how do
communities of coauthors and acquaintances overlap?

findings from this research are presented in the next sections.

in the
remainder of this section, i discuss the data collection procedures and the
instruments employed in this study.

2.2. bibliographic data and coauthorship network

the coauthorship network of this scienti   c community was constructed
from its bibliographic record, gathered from all scholarly items listed in seven
available cens annual reports (2003   2009). a publication database was
assembled, consisting of 608 papers published by a total of 391 unique in-
dividuals over a period of ten years (2000   2009). table 1 summarizes the
distribution of papers analyzed by publication type, and number of authors.
roughly two-thirds of publications analyzed are papers in conference pro-
ceedings, while journal articles take up the other third of the volume of pub-
lications. the distribution of items per number of authors reveals that about
half of all publications are authored by two or three individuals. author lists
rarely exceed six authors.

this bibliographic record was employed to construct the coauthorship
network   a network in which nodes represent authors and edges represent the
extent of coauthorship activity. the network is weighted and the edge weights
are established by partitioning a set value for every publication.
in order
to determine the weights between nodes, i.e., the strength of collaboration
among coauthors, i use a weighting mechanism by which the weight of the
edge between nodes i and j is:

wij =

  k
i   k
j
nk     1

,

(1)

(cid:88)

k

5

table 1: basic statistics for the collected bibliographic data: paper distribution by publi-
cation type, publication year, and number of authors
paper type
conference proceedings
journal article
book chapter
book
number of authors
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10+ (where 14 is the maximum number of authors found)

n = 608
400
189
18
1
n = 608
59
155
158
94
59
32
19
13
5
14

where   k
is 1 if author i collaborated on paper k (and zero otherwise) and
i
nk is the number of coauthors of paper k. as such, this weighting mecha-
nism confers more weight to small and frequent collaborations, based on the
assumptions that: i) publications authored by a small number of individu-
als involve stronger interpersonal collaboration than multi-authored publica-
tions, and ii) authors that have authored multiple papers together know each
other better on average and thus collaborate more strongly than occasional
coauthors. using this weighting mechanism, a network of coauthorship is
constructed. it is depicted and analyzed in the next section.

2.3. survey instrument and acquaintanceship network

a survey instrument was designed and implemented to ask cens coau-
thors to indicate their acquaintances. this study is speci   cally aimed at
investigating a form of personal acquaintanceship that involves name and
face recognition. for this reason, surveyed subjects are asked to indicate as
acquaintances individuals that a) they have previously met in person, and
that b) they would say    hi    to if they bumped into them. this description

6

is aimed at discriminating between forms of genuine personal acquaintance-
ship, and other forms of acquaintanceship that do not necessarily involve a
personal component, e.g., name cognizance based solely on email correspon-
dence.

the survey roster consisted of 388 individuals, i.e., all the authors ex-
tracted from the bibliographic record (391) minus the individuals for whom
no contact information could be found (3). individuals in the roster were
invited to take part in the survey via a recruitment letter, sent via electronic
mail. the survey instrument was structured in two parts.

in the    rst part, respondents are asked to select their acquaintances from
a list of all of the individuals in the survey roster. individuals are identi   ed
by name and a thumbnail picture. in order to aid recognition, individuals
are grouped together by department and institutional a   liation. respon-
dents select their acquaintances on this page and after submitting the data
are taken to the second part of the survey.
in the second part, they are
then asked to indicate the nature and length of the relationship with their
acquaintances. respondents are prompted with the list of people that they
selected as acquaintances in the previous page. for each individual they in-
dicate as acquaintance, two questions are asked: when did you    rst meet?
(2001 or earlier, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, this year), and
how often are you in touch? (at least once/week, at least once/month,
occasionally, rarely or never). screen-shots of the    rst and second parts of
the questionnaire are included in the appendix a, figures a.5 and a.6.

a total of 191 responses were collected. some basic statistics relative
to the data collected via the survey instrument are summarized in table 2.
nearly half of respondents invited to    ll in the survey (49%) participated in
the study. the rest were either not reachable (4%), or did not respond to the
survey by the end of data collection (47%). about one third of respondents
(39%) only completed the    rst part of the survey. the vast majority of
respondents indicated a number of acquaintances ranging between 5 and 40.
responses to the survey were obtained independently from one another
and resulted in either reciprocal or non-reciprocal ties, as well as complete or
incomplete data. four di   erent scenarios based on the responses obtained are
summarized in figure 1: (1) complete data, reciprocal tie, (2) complete data,
non-reciprocal tie, (3) incomplete data, non-reciprocal tie, and (4) missing
data.

the typology presented in figure 1 includes both reciprocal ties (repre-
sented in a directed network by bidirectional edges) and non-reciprocal ties

7

table 2: basic statistics for the collected social survey data.

survey response
respondents
non-respondents
unreachable
portion of survey completed
full survey
only part one
number of acquaintances
1-5
5-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-60
60-70
70-100
100+ (maximum is 197)

n = 388
191 (49 %)
182 (47 %)
15 (4 %)
n = 191
116 (61 %)
75 (39 %)
n = 191
12
21
47
38
19
12
16
9
10
7

figure 1: four possible classes of acquaintanceship ties: (1) complete data, reciprocal
tie, (2) complete data, non-reciprocal tie, (3) incomplete data, non-reciprocal tie, and (4)
missing data. filled (black) nodes represent individuals who took the survey, while blank
(white) nodes depict individuals who did not respond.

8

?(1)respondedabbaaabb(2)(3)(4)did not respondnon-reciprocal tiereciprocal tie?missing datatable 3: a summary of the data collected in the online survey of acquaintanceship.

tie case

(1)
(2)
(3)

totals

data
complete
complete
incomplete

type of tie
reciprocal
non-reciprocal
non-reciprocal

# ties
2756 (45%)
976 (16 %)
2451 (39 %)
6183 (100%)

(unidirectional edges). for the purpose of this study, network directionality
is not of fundamental importance, mostly because the coauthorship network
is natively undirected and maintaining information about acquaintanceship
reciprocity would not enable additional analyses and comparisons. for this
reason, directed acquaintanceship ties are converted to undirected edges us-
ing a an available-case analysis (little and rubin, 1990), i.e., by including
all reciprocal and non-reciprocal ties with both complete and partial descrip-
tions. thus, the acquaintanceship network includes ties (1), (2) and (3)2,
from figure 1, broken down as presented in table 3.

in the second part of the survey, respondents were asked to indicate how
long they have known their acquaintances for and how frequently they are in
touch with them. particularly relevant to this discussion is the data regarding
the frequency of communication, that was used to compute edge weight.
table 4 summarizes the data collected in this portion of the study.

as shown in table 4, respondents provided data relative to the frequency
of communication for about three quarters of the total number of acquain-
tances indicated. moreover, a quick analysis of the distribution of responses
reveals that nearly half of all acquaintances (2245 out of 4621) communicate
rarely or never. about a third of all ties (1539 out of 4621) are based on
occasional communication. only about a    fth of all ties relies on frequent
communications (once a month and once a week). this information is used
to assign a weight to the edges connecting acquaintances. frequent commu-
nication are given a higher weight, based on the assumption that frequent
communication involves a higher degree of cognizance among individuals,

2in order to justify the reconstruction of case (2) and (3) ties, two tests were performed.
the    rst test involved checking that the population of respondents was not systematically
di   erent from the population at large, i.e., that the distribution of respondents in terms
of departmental and institutional a   liation matched that of the entire population. the
second test involved manually inspecting incomplete data.

9

table 4: a summary of the data collected in the second part of the online survey of
acquaintanceship.
how often do you communicate with [name]?
did not respond (no data available)
responded:
..........rarely or never (0.25)
..........occasionally (0.50)
..........at least once/month (0.75)
..........at least once/week (1.0)

1668 (26%)
4621 (74%)
2245
1539
421
416

regardless of the nature of the relationship (formal or informal). if respon-
dents indicate to communicate once a week, the edge among them is weighted
1.0; acquaintances communicating at least once a month are assigned with
a weight of 0.75. occasional communication is weighted 0.5 and even less
frequent communication is weighted 0.25. all collected data (including par-
tial and non-reciprocal data) were documented and used construct weighted
edges. the resulting weighted network of acquaintanceship is presented and
depicted in the next section.

3. analysis and results

3.1. statistical properties and topology of the networks

some statistical properties of the constructed coauthorship and acquain-
tanceship networks are presented in table 5. an analysis of these statistics
provides insights into the collaborative con   guration of this scienti   c com-
munity and its underlying mechanisms.

table 5: statistical properties of the studied coauthorship and acquaintanceship networks.
property
acquaintanceship
385
nodes, n
4 805
edges, m
average path length, (cid:96)
2.427
0.359
id91 coe   cient, c
degree assortativity, r
-0.060

coauthorship
391
1 747
2.952
0.301
0.013

10

the coauthorship network includes a total of 1747 scholarly collaborations
(edges) among 391 authors (nodes). the acquaintanceship network, with
385 nodes, is comparable in size to the coauthorship network: the results
of the survey covered almost the entire range of coauthors. what di   ers
greatly, however, is the number of edges in the acquaintanceship network,
which are far more numerous than are coauthoring ties (4805 vs. 1747).
this indicates that, at a broad level, there are more researchers connected
to each other via interpersonal relationships than by coauthorship. this
simple    nding is a    rst probe into the    rst research question proposed above
(rq.1). it portrays a collaborative ecology in which acquaintanceship ties are
far more frequent than coauthoring relationships, despite cens, like most
collaboratories, being built upon the underlying assumption of distributed,
remote collaboration (which does not necessarily require a personal level of
acquaintanceship).

two other statistical properties indicated in table 5 are the average path
length and the id91 coe   cient. the average path length is the aver-
age number of steps needed to connect any two nodes in a network.
its
it takes on average two
value is relatively small across the two networks:
to three steps to connect any two individuals both in the coauthorship and
acquaintanceship networks, connoting well-connected networks in which in-
formation can transfer easily between nodes. the id91 coe   cient, i.e.,
the density of cliques in a network, is also similar in both networks and is
relatively low, indicating that both networks are not signi   cantly dense. the
fact that both networks exhibit similar id91 coe   cients suggests that
the modalities by which researchers connect do not change signi   cantly based
on the platform of collaboration: whether it is scholarly papers or interper-
sonal knowledge relationships, researchers form communities that result in
similar topologies. many real networks, including scienti   c coauthorship and
acquaintanceship networks, have been observed to be small-world networks
(watts and strogatz, 1998), i.e., they have low average path length and high
id91 coe   cient. the networks presented here slightly deviate from this
small-world model3.

a    nal statistical property calculated on the cens networks of coau-

3for a comparison, consider the coauthorship networks in biology ((cid:96) = 4.92, c = 0.60)
(newman, 2001), and neuroscience ((cid:96) = 5.7, c = 0.76) (barab  asi et al., 2002), and
acquaintanceship networks of movie actors ((cid:96) = 3.48 and c = 0.78) (watts and strogatz,
1998) and corporate company directors ((cid:96) = 4.60 and c = 0.88) (davis et al., 2003).

11

thors and acquaintances is assortativity (newman, 2002). assortativity, is a
measure of homophily in a network, i.e., it measures the tendency for nodes
with similar characteristics to attach to one another. assortativity can be
calculated for a numer of discrete or categorical features of a network. for
example, a measure of assortativity by ethnicity in a social network would re-
veal how individuals of same ethnicity preferentially attach to one another. a
widely studied measure of assortativity in scienti   c networks is degree assor-
tativity, i.e., the tendency for scientists to preferentially attach to others with
similar network degree, where degree is simply the number of edges attached
to a node. thus, a high assortativity coe   cient in a coauthorship network
(r     1) means that proli   c authors collaborate preferentially with other pro-
li   c authors. inversely, a low assortativity coe   cient (r     0) indicates that
proli   c authors collaborate both with proli   c and non-proli   c authors, with-
out preference. network studies of scienti   c coauthorship and acquaintance-
ship have shown moderate degree assortativity coe   cients4. the near-zero
assortativity coe   cients of the coauthorship (r = 0.013) and acquaintance-
ship networks (r =    0.060) of cens, indicate a contrasting scenario: there is
no signi   cant tendency for individuals to write papers or establish friendships
with others with a similar number of collaborators.

the statistical properties of table 5 can be used to draw some prelimi-
nary conclusions regarding the overall topology of coauthorship and acquain-
tanceship patterns at cens (rq.1). as discussed above, i    nd that acquain-
tanceship ties are far more frequent than coauthoring ties. this result, alone,
highlights the prevalence of personal-level relationships in a distributed col-
laborative environment. from a topological perspective, both coauthorship
and acquaintanceship networks are comparable: they feature short average
path length, low id91, and near-zero degree assortativity. these results
point to a well-connected,    uid, and inclusive ecology of collaboration. this
con   guration, in turn, indicates that no speci   c    attachment    mechanisms

4examples are the networks of coauthorship in physics (r = 0.363) (newman, 2001),
biology (r = 0.127) (newman, 2001), and mathematics (r = 0.120) (castro and grossman,
1999; grossman and ion, 1995). these results indicate that proli   c authors in these dis-
ciplines tend to coauthor papers with other physicists of similar high standing. similarly,
social networks of movie actors (watts and strogatz, 1998) and company directors (davis
et al., 2003) have both been found to exhibit some form of assortativity (r = 0.208 and
r = 0.276, respectively). this means that both the world of entertainment and that of
corporations are ecologies in which prestige and popularity matter.

12

table 6: acquainted and non-acquainted coauthors.

quantity
acquainted coauthors
non-acquainted coauthors
total coauthors

nodes
305 (78%)
86 (22%)
391

edges
1 134 (64%)
613 (36%)
1, 747

can be identi   ed for the formation of coauthoring and acquaintanceship ties:
researchers with di   erent network degrees (e.g., both proli   c and marginal
authors)    attach    to one another without abiding to de   nite preferential
rules. this result is further discussed in the next section.

3.2. comparison of the networks and community structure

the social networks studied in this article portray two di   erent relation-
ships (coauthorship and acquaintanceship) among the same set of individuals
(cens researchers). a simple way to determine how these networks are re-
lated to one another is by calculating the portion of coauthorship ties that
are also acquaintanceship ties, and, thus, the number of individuals who are
both coauthors and acquaintances. this breakdown is provided in table 6.
the results in the table show that the vast majority of coauthors (over three
quarters) also know each other on a personal level. also, most coauthoring
events in this scienti   c community (about two thirds) were performed with
acquaintances.

a more precise statistical measure of inter-network comparison can be ob-
tained by performing a quadratic assignment procedure (qap) correlation
(krackhardt, 1988). given two networks that represent di   erent relation-
ships (edges) of the same individuals (nodes), qap methods calculate the
pearson   s correlation coe   cient on corresponding cells. in the case consid-
ered here, a qap correlation reveals the id203 that a coauthorship tie
among two individuals is related to the id203 of an acquaintanceship
tie among the same individuals.
in other words, are coauthors also likely
to be acquaintances? the observed qap correlation between the coauthor-
ship and acquaintanceship networks was found to be r = 0.372 (p < .001)
supporting the proposition that individuals who coauthor papers are likely

13

to know each other in person5. these    ndings indicate that in the context
of the medium-sized, inter-institutional, distributed collaboration analyzed
here, coauthors are likely to be acquainted with one another (rq.2). this
result is further discussed in the next section.

while the comparative analysis above provides an understanding of how
these networks overlap at a broad level, further analysis is required to under-
stand more in detail the actual arrangement of collaboration circles within
these networks. a study of community structure enables a network to be par-
titioned into clusters and comparatively analyze how di   erent con   gurations
of collaboration patterns overlap with each other. community structures,
also called structural communities, are    cliquish    groupings of nodes that
are highly connected between them, but poorly connected to other nodes
(girvan and newman, 2002). in the coauthorship and acquaintanceship net-
works, the clusters detected via a structural analysis correspond to commu-
nities of collaborating researchers that write papers together and know each
other, respectively. how do these clusters compare with each other?

the community detection method used here is the spinglass algorithm
(reichardt and bornholdt, 2006). this method relies on an analogy between
the statistical mechanics of networks and physical spin glass models to de-
construct a network into communities. in doing so, it assigns a community
membership value to each node. thus, individuals who are in the same
structural community are given the same membership value. the structural
communities found in the collaboration networks via the spinglass algorithm
are diagrammed in figures 2 and 3. each    gure presents a network with
nodes colored according to the structural community that they belong to.
each community is represented using a di   erent color (or shade). node
diameter represents the betweenness centrality score of nodes, where more
central nodes have larger diameters. the histogram associated with each fig-
ure describes the frequency distribution of each community, i.e., the number
of scholars in each identi   ed structural community.

a total of 14 structural communities were found in the coauthorship net-
work (figure 2). the population distribution histogram shows that three
single communities (with populations 76, 66, and 58) cover about half of the
entire coauthorship population. the remaining coauthorship communities

5qap correlation tests between the coauthorship network and a randomly generated

network of the same size returned r =    .002 (p = 0.719)

14

figure 2: structural communities in the coauthorship network detected according to the
spinglass algorithm. node color represents structural community membership. node
diameter represents betweenness centrality. associated histogram describes the frequency
distribution of each community.

are smaller in size (with an average of 15 members). the acquaintanceship
network was partitioned into 8 communities (figure 3). the population dis-

15

1234567891011121314010203040506070figure 3: structural communities in the acquaintanceship network detected according to
the spinglass algorithm. node color represents structural community membership. node
diameter represents betweenness centrality. associated histogram describes the frequency
distribution of each community.

tribution shows that there are three acquaintanceship communities that are
highly populated (with populations 101, 79, and 62) and the remainder of
the nodes more or less evenly distributed in the remaining    ve communities.
the network diagrams of figures 2 and 3 show the repartition of the
networks into clusters of collaboration. more analysis is needed to reveal

16

12345678020406080100how these arrangements of collaboration di   er with each other, i.e., how re-
searchers group into communities of coauthorship and acquaintanceship. a
statistical comparison to measure community overlap in the networks is per-
formed by use of tests of independence that determine whether community
membership in one network is dependent or independent on membership in
the other network. a contingency table portraying a numerical representa-
tion of the overlap between community membership in these two networks is
presented in table 7. this table displays the association between the coau-
thorship and acquaintanceship networks, i.e. between circles of collaboration
depicted in figures 2 and 3. columns in this table (the x-axis) list commu-
nity membership values in the acquaintanceship network and rows (y-axis)
in the coauthorship network.

hhhhh

a

c

table 7: contingency table presenting the community membership association between
the coauthorship (   c   , columns) and acquaintanceship (   a   , rows) networks with total
membership counts (   t   ).

2

7
23
34
2

1

50
1

6
1
18

4

8

1
16

3

37
10
5
2

4

76

66

58

25

5

8

13

1
1
23

6

1
1

20

22

7

1
18

1

1
21

8

2
3
14

9

10

11

12

13

14

2
1
1
12

15

1

1
1

9
11

9

9

2

6

6

2

t

101
74
56
45
30
27
26
11
370

19

16

16

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
t

analyzing the composition of table 7, it can be seen that some com-
munities overlap nearly perfectly, while others are highly partitioned. for
example, community # 11 in the coauthorship network and community # 8
in the acquaintanceship network overlap almost completely. both communi-
ties are composed of 11 individuals and 9 of them are found to be part of the
same communities of coauthorship and acquaintanceship. figure 4 depicts
such anecdotal example. the    gure shows that this coauthorship community
is tightly centered around one individual (node d) whom collaborates sep-
arately with di   erent groups (e.g., with b and c, with i, j, and k, etc.).
it is interesting to note that this community is very marginalized from the
rest of the coauthorship network: only nodes a, b, and d have connections
with nodes outside this community (dashed edges). the tightly overlapping

17

acquaintanceship community is composed of roughly the same nodes, but
the relationships among them are more frequent and dense: nearly every-
one is connected to everyone else in this acquaintanceship community. this
indicates that even though not all members of a coauthoring community col-
laborate directly with each other, they are likely to know each other. also,
while the members of this community are separated from the rest of the
coauthorship network (i.e., they only write papers with each other), they are
considerably more integrated with the social network (dashed lines represent
social relationships with the outside).

figure 4: anecdotal example: a case of overlap of coauthorship and acquaintanceship
communities. the inset image in the top right corner shows community # 11 in the
coauthorship network (n = 11, m = 16). the inset image at the bottom right corner
shows community # 8 in the acquaintanceship network (n = 11, m = 29). the main
image shows the overlap between these two communities.

while this anecdotal example provides a precise understanding of the

18

abcdfjkhgielmabcdfjkhgielmcdfjkhgiecoauthorship network, community #11acquaintanceship network, community #8acquaintanceship networkcommunity #8coauthorship networkcommunity #11scholarly and social organization of a given community, a signi   cance test is
needed to determine statistically the level of independence between commu-
nity membership at a broader level. a reliable test of independence when
dealing with samples of su   ciently large size that do not su   er from data
sparseness is pearson   s   2 (reiser and lin, 1999). to overcome data sparse-
ness, i directly manipulate data in table 7 by removing rows and columns
with low frequency counts until less than one    fth of its cell expectations are
below 5, as suggested by cochran (1954). the reduced contingency table,
subjected to independence test returned a high pearson   s   2 score of 301.45
(p < .001), indicating a strong, statistically signi   cant correlation between
community membership in these two networks6. these results suggest that
communities of coauthors and acquaintances overlap very well, i.e., coauthors
of scholarly papers tend to form communities of collaboration that coincide
with communities of personal acquaintances (rq.2).

4. discussion

as scienti   c research endeavors become larger, more variegated in their
disciplinary component, and more distributed geographically, the practices
of scienti   c collaboration and communication are subject to radical changes.
the disciplinary, institutional, and geographical diversity that characterizes
emerging research endeavors such as collaboratories and cyberinfrastructure
initiatives is such that researchers necessarily rely on computer supported
technologies for their scienti   c collaboration, communication, and organiza-
tion. understanding the role that physical interaction and interpersonal com-
munication play on distributed scienti   c work   ows of this kind can prove use-
ful in guiding, promoting and sustaining scienti   c collaboration (bos et al.,
2007).

the research presented here elucidates the relationship between coau-
thorship and acquaintanceship patterns in a medium-sized distributed, multi-
disciplinary collaboratory. the    rst portion of this research aims at unveiling
the topological properties of these networks and the mechanisms by which
they are generated. results show that acquaintanceship relations are far
more numerous than coauthorship ties: researchers know each other well

6a fisher   s exact test on the same table also returned a p-value below 0.001

19

within their coauthorship circle and beyond. from a topological perspective,
however, the two networks are not very dissimilar: they share low average
path length, and relatively low id91 coe   cient. an analysis of de-
gree assortativity reveals that both the coauthorship and acquaintanceship
networks are    uid and inclusive:
individuals of all degrees collaborate and
know each other regardless of standing (near-zero degree assortativity coef-
   cient). overall, results of this topological analysis are telling of the social
practices and authorship conventions of this speci   c community. the over-
whelming predominance of acquaintanceship ties and the lack of preferential
attachment rules substantiate the notion that the center under study is a
   uid social ecology in which befriending patterns are ubiquitous and are
not in   uenced by standing or prestige. in other words, i    nd no prestige-
based dynamics by which proli   c, well-known researchers collaborate with
researchers of similar status. the near-zero degree assortativity suggests
that as new members enter the cens collaborative ecology (with low de-
gree) they begin to collaborate both with proli   c and with marginal indi-
viduals in their coauthorship and friendship networks. this constant mixing
between individuals of all degrees keeps the network from becoming cliquish.
this open social con   guration not only bene   ts young students and new-
comers, but it also contributes to making it a more diverse and inclusive
collaborative environment. similarly, the authorship of scholarly articles is
an inclusive practice: scholars of di   erent network centrality (both proli   c
and non-proli   c authors) are observed to collaborate with each other without
speci   c prestige-based attachment rules. this is not an isolated    nding of
this study; it is consonant with the authorship norms that operate at cens
and that support inclusion of scholars of all ranks and of many career levels
in the preparation and publication of articles. these results imply that novel
scholarly reward structures and recognition mechanisms may be emerging
from cyberinfrastructure-enabled initiatives.

the second portion of this research aims to analyze the structural com-
position of the coauthorship and acquaintanceship networks in a compara-
tive manner. results of a qap correlation test indicate that the networks
overlap signi   cantly and, thus, that coauthors of this community are likely
to be acquainted. this    nding was con   rmed by an analysis of the com-
munity structure of the coauthorship and acquaintanceship networks which
revealed overlapping con   gurations: tight-knit circles of coauthors overlap
with social circles of acquaintances. this con   guration, in turn, sheds light
on social substructure of coauthoring events. scienti   c collaboration nur-

20

tures via small-scale, localized, inter-personal networks. this    nding is in
agreement with previous research, mostly qualitative in nature, which sug-
gests that collaborative synergies in cyberinfrastructure research are often
the result of assemblages of people found through personal networks rather
than the outcome of organizational planning and structuring (nardi et al.,
2002; engestr  om et al., 1999).

this result   that coauthors are likely to know each other   is also impor-
tant for it indicates that in the context of medium-sized, inter-institutional,
distributed collaborations such as the one analyzed here, acquaintanceship
ties among coauthors can be safely inferred. this result, however, has to
be combined with the previous    nding: that acquaintanceship relations are
far more numerous than coauthorship ties. thus, while it is safe to assume
that in modern cyberinfrastructure initiatives coauthoring e   orts are largely
based on an interpersonal bond of acquaintanceship, coauthorship cannot be
utilized as an absolute proxy for acquaintanceship: acquaintanceship circles
extend well beyond coauthorship circles.

it is worth discussing how the    ndings presented in this article are gen-
eralizable to other scienti   c communities. in sum,    ndings of this research
portray a con   guration of scienti   c collaboration driven by social cohesion:
interpersonal knowledge is the glue that holds together the scienti   c commu-
nity under study. while these results are speci   c to the cens environment,
they can safely be extended to other cyberinfrastructure initiatives that are a)
similar in size and b) similar in their multi-disciplinary component. the size
of the research center is an obvious factor to consider when extending these
   ndings to other environments. larger, as well as smaller, research centers
will naturally function on di   erent collaboration paradigms. but the combi-
nation of social and scholarly assemblages found in a medium-sized center of
few hundred researchers is likely to resemble that of cens. a further factor
to consider is the multi-disciplinary constitution of cens. naturally, di   er-
ent scienti   c communities function according to di   erent authorship norms.
but, being intrinsically multi-disciplinary, cens is a hybrid milieu, where
discipline-speci   c norms converge and blend with one another. thus,    nd-
ings of this research can be extended to medium-sized cyberinfrastructure
initiatives with a multi-disciplinary orientation.

framing this research in the context of cyberinfrastructure studies, an
important result that emerges is that social cohesion is at the basis of sci-
enti   c collaboration. that is, even though the collaboratory is by de   nition
predicated upon notions of remote collaboration and computer-supported

21

communication, this study shows that social acquaintanceship relations are
at the core of collaboration activity. given the crucial role of social relation-
ships for the advancement of scholarly collaboration, one wonders whether
the cyberinfrastructure vision of a    uid, distributed, multi-sited science, ag-
nostic to geographical and physical constraints, can ever be attained.
in
this context, this work reinforces previous recommendations to consider the
spatial, social, and human arrangements that drive scienti   c advancement
and collaboration, and how they di   er across di   erent disciplines and orga-
nizational settings (olson and olson, 2000; cummings and kiesler, 2005).
bringing this recommendation to the attention of policy makers and funding
agencies has the potential to shape the direction and form of future invest-
ments and e   orts in cyberinfrastructure.

5. acknowledgement

this article is an abridged version of a chapter of my doctoral dissertation
titled    structure and evolution of scienti   c collaboration networks in a mod-
ern research collaboratory    defended and    led at the university of california,
los angeles in 2010. the full text of the dissertation is openly available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1616935. sup-
plemental material and replication data for the dissertation and this arti-
cle,
including source code and collected data, a also openly available at
http://hdl.handle.net/1902.1/15254. for the preparation of this arti-
cle, i would like to thank my doctoral chair christine borgman, as well as
mark hansen, marko rodriguez, and all my former colleagues at cens.

references

barab  asi, a. l., jeong, h., neda, z., ravasz, e., schubert, a., vicsek, t.,
2002. evolution of the social network of scienti   c collaborations. physica
a 311 (3-4).

b  orner, k., dall   asta, l., ke, w., vespignani, a., 2005. studying the emerg-
ing global brain: analyzing and visualizing the impact of co-authorship
teams: research articles. complexity 10 (4), 57   67.

22

bos, n., zimmerman, a., olson, j., yew, j., yerkie, j., dahl, e., olson,
g., 2007. from shared databases to communities of practice: a taxonomy
of collaboratories. journal of computer-mediated communication 12 (2),
652   672.

braun, t., glanzel, w., schubert, a., 2001. publication and cooperation
patterns of the authors of neuroscience journals. scientometrics 51 (3),
499   510.

castro, r. d., grossman, j. w., 1999. famous trails to paul erd  os. the

mathematical intelligencer 21.

chin, g., myers, j., hoyt, d., 2002. social networks in the virtual science

laboratory. communications of the acm 45 (8), 87   92.

cochran, w. g., 1954. some methods for strengthening the common chi-

square tests. biometrics 10 (4), 417   451.

crandall, d. j., backstrom, l., cosley, d., suri, s., huttenlocher, d., klein-
berg, j., 12 2010. inferring social ties from geographic coincidences. pro-
ceedings of the national academy of sciences 107 (52), 22436   22441.

cummings, j. n., kiesler, s., 2005. collaborative research across disciplinary
and organizational boundaries. social studies of science 35 (5), 703   722.

davis, g. f., yoo, m., baker, w. e., 2003. the small world of the american

corporate elite, 1982-2001. strategic organization 1 (3), 301   326.

engestr  om, y., engestr  om, r., v  ah  aaho, t., 1999. when the center doesn   t
hold: the importance of knotworking. in: chaiklin, s., hedegaard, m.,
jensen, u. (eds.), activity theory and social practice. aarhus university
press.

finholt, t., 2002. collaboratories. in: cronin, b. (ed.), annual review of
information science & technology. vol. 36. information today, pp. 73   107.

girvan, m., newman, m. e. j., 2002. community structure in social and
biological networks. proceedings of the national academy of sciences 99,
7821.

grossman, j. w., ion, p. d. f., 1995. on a portion of the well-known col-

laboration graph. congressus numerantium 108, 129   131.

23

hara, n., solomon, p., kim, s.-l., sonnenwald, d. h., 2003. an emerging
view of scienti   c collaboration: scientists    perspectives on collaboration
and factors that impact collaboration. journal of the american society for
information science & technology 54 (10), 952   965.

holme, p., 2004. structure and time evolution of an internet dating commu-

nity. social networks 26 (2), 155   174.

krackhardt, d., dec. 1988. predicting with networks: nonparametric multi-

ple regression analysis of dyadic data. social networks 10 (4), 359   381.

kraut, r. e., galegherb, j., egidoa, c., 1987. relationships and tasks in

scienti   c research collaboration. human-computer interaction 3 (1).

liberman, s., wolf, k. b., 1997. the    ow of knowledge: scienti   c contacts

in formal meetings. social networks 19 (3), 271    283.

lievrouw, l. a., rogers, e. m., lowe, c. u., nadel, e., 1987. triangulation
as a research strategy for identifying invisible colleges among biomedical
scientists. social networks 9, 217   248.

little, r., rubin, d., 1990. the analysis of social science data with missing

values. sociological methods and research 18, 292   326.

nardi, b. a., whittaker, s., schwarz, h., 2002. networkers and their activity
in intensionalnetworks. journal of computer supported cooperative work
11 (1-2), 205   242.

newman, m. e. j., 2001. the structure of scienti   c collaboration networks.
proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of
america 98 (2), 404   409.

newman, m. e. j., 2002. assortative mixing in networks. physical review

letters 89 (20).

newman, m. e. j., 2004. who is the best connected scientist? a study
of scienti   c coauthorship networks. in: ben-naim, e., frauenfelder, h.,
toroczkai, z. (eds.), complex networks. springer, pp. 337   370.

olson, g. m., olson, j. s., 2000. distance matters. human-computer inter-

action 15 (2), 139   178.

24

pepe, a., rodriguez, m. a., 2010. collaboration in sensor network research:
an in-depth longitudinal analysis of assortative mixing patterns. sciento-
metrics 84 (3).

reichardt, j., bornholdt, s., 2006. statistical mechanics of community de-

tection. physical review e 74 (016110).

reiser, m., lin, y., 1999. a goodness-of-   t test for the latent class model
when expected frequencies are small. sociological methodology 29, 81   111.

schummer, j., 2004. multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity, and patterns of
research collaboration in nanoscience and nanotechnology. scientometrics
59 (3), 425   465.

solomon, j., 12 2009. programmers, professors, and parasites: credit and
co-authorship in computer science. science and engineering ethics 15 (4),
467   489.

tomassini, m., luthi, l., giacobini, m., langdon, w. b., 2007. the structure
of the genetic programming collaboration network. genetic programming
and evolvable machines 8 (1), 97   103.

tong, s. t., van der heide, b., langwell, l., walther, j. b., 2008. too much
of a good thing? the relationship between number of friends and interper-
sonal impressions on facebook. journal of computer-mediated communi-
cation 13 (3), 531   549.

watts, d. j., strogatz, s. h., 1998. collective dynamics of small-world net-

works. nature 393 (6684), 440   442.

25

appendix a. acquaintanceship survey instrument

figure a.5: screenshot of the    rst page of the survey instrument.

figure a.6: screenshot of the second page of the survey instrument.

26

