1
1
0
2

 

g
u
a
 
5
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
1
2
5

.

8
0
1
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

experimental test of airplane boarding methods

jason h. ste   en

fermilab center for particle astrophysics, batavia, il

jon hotchkiss

hotchkiss industries, sherman oaks, ca

abstract
we report the results of an experimental comparison of di   erent airplane boarding methods. this test was conducted
in a mock 757 fuselage, located on a southern california soundstage, with 12 rows of six seats and a single aisle.
five methods were tested using 72 passengers of various ages. we found a signi   cant reduction in the boarding times
of optimized methods over traditional methods. these improved methods, if properly implemented, could result in a
signi   cant savings to airline companies.

keywords: airplane boarding

1. introduction

the process of boarding an airplane is of interest to a
variety of groups. the public is interested both as a cu-
riosity, as it is something that they may regularly expe-
rience, and as a consumer, as their experiences good or
bad can a   ect their loyalties. airline companies and their
employees also have a stake in an e   cient boarding pro-
cedure as time saved in the boarding process may result is
monetary savings, in the quality of interactions with pas-
sengers, and in the application of human resources to the
general process of preparing an airplane for departure.

a recent study (nyquist and mcfadden, 2008) indi-
cates that the average cost to an airline company for each
minute of time spent at the terminal is roughly $30. thus,
each minute saved in the turn-around time of a    ight has
the potential to generate over $16,000,000 in annual sav-
ings (assuming an average of 1500    ights per day). while
the boarding process may not be the primary source of

email addresses: jsteffen@fnal.gov (jason h. ste   en),

jon@jonhotchkiss.com (jon hotchkiss)

delay in returning an airplane to the skies, reducing the
boarding time may e   ectively eliminate passenger board-
ing as a contributor in any meaningful measure. conse-
quently, subsequent e   orts to streamline the other neces-
sary tasks, such as refueling and maintenance, would be
rewarded with a material reduction in time at the gate for
each    ight.

several studies of the airplane boarding process ex-
ist (nagel and ferrari, 2005; van den briel et al., 2005;
bazargan, 2007; landeghem and beuselinck, 2002; stef-
fen, 2008a,b; bachmat et al., 2006) and many of the con-
clusions are universal. the optimization is essentially a
reduction of the number of times that passengers must ei-
ther wait for or traverse each other, whether in the aisle (an
aisle interference) or within a given row of seats (a seat
interference). some methods resulting from these studies
are having the passengers seated at the windows board-
ing    rst, followed by the middle and aisle seats (hereafter
called    wilma   ). another method is the    reverse pyra-
mid    method which adds an emphasis on boarding the
rear of the cabin    rst (van den briel et al., 2005). both the
wilma method and the reverse pyramid method speci   -

preprint submitted to journal of air transport management

august 29, 2011

cally eliminate seat interferences and, to di   ering degrees,
aisle interferences.

many of these previous studies concentrated on meth-
ods involving boarding groups rather than having passen-
gers line up in a speci   ed order. thus, the authors could
identify the best method of those that were tested, but
it was not known if those methods represented the opti-
mum boarding method overall. ste   en (2008a) claims to
have identi   ed the optimum boarding method under cer-
tain assumptions. this method (which we call the ste   en
method) added to the reduction of aisle and seat interfer-
ences the idea of e   cient, parallel use of the aisle. for
example, if passengers are ordered such that the plane
boards from the rear window seats, row-by-row to the
front aisle seat there would be no seat interferences and no
passenger would need to pass another in the aisle. how-
ever, in this scenario only the lead passenger or two would
be able to stow their luggage   the rest of the passengers
would simply be    lling the aisle (rather than aisle inter-
ferences being eliminated, they are universal).

the ste   en method, on the other hand, orders the pas-
sengers in such a way that adjacent passengers in line are
sitting in corresponding seats two rows apart from each
other (e.g., 12a, 10a, 8a, 6a, etc.). this method trades
a small number of aisle interferences at the front of the
cabin, for the bene   t of having multiple passengers stow-
ing their luggage simultaneously. other methods, such as
wilma and the reverse pyramid also realize parallel use
of the aisle in a natural way as adjacent passengers are
frequently sitting in widely separated rows.

practical implementation aside,

the ste   en method
claims to be the fastest possible method, on average, to
board passengers onto an airplane with a single door and a
single aisle. we test that claim here. other claims made in
ste   en (2008a) that we test in this experiment include: 1)
random boarding (where passengers have assigned seats,
but are allowed to board at any time) should perform as
well as wilma and 2) that boarding in blocks should per-
form worse than wilma, random, and the ste   en method.
both of these secondary predictions are based upon ef-
   ciency considerations in the use of the aisle to stow
luggage   random, wilma, and the ste   en method spread
passengers throughout the cabin while boarding in blocks
tends to concentrate passengers in one part of the air-
craft. we note that ste   en (2008a) does not fully treat
seat interferences   which will be a likely source of dis-

crepancy between the predictions in ste   en (2008a) and
reality. another claim that we were not able to test, but
which could be part of a future study, is that due to inef-
   ciency in the use of the aisle, boarding from the back to
the front of the cabin is nearly as bad as boarding from the
front to the back.

this article is organized as follows.

in section 2 we
describe the facility we used to conduct the test, the ge-
ometry of the mock airplane, and the assignments given to
the passengers. section 3 discusses details of the di   er-
ent methods we tested and how they were implemented.
we present the results of our test in section 4 and discuss
them in some detail in section 5. our concluding remarks
are given in section 6.

2. experimental setup

we conducted this experiment at the air hollywood
soundstage in studio city, ca. the narrow-body mock
airplane was used which had 12 rows of six seats with a
single, central aisle. a small    rst-class section (two rows
of seats) was used for camera and lighting equipment. the
width of the fuselage is 11    7   . each seat has the standard
17    width not including the 2    armrest. rows of seats
are spaced 32    and the aisle was 21    wide. the over-
head bins were standard for older-model aircraft, but are
slighly smaller than modern bins. in particular, the over-
head bins did not accomodate standard size roll-aboard
luggage when inserted wheels    rst.

we employed 72 passengers   volunteers and holly-
wood extras. the ages of the passengers ranged from
young children age    ve through retired seniors with the
bulk of passengers being employment-age adults (we did
not solicit or record passenger ages). passengers gen-
erally had a bag, roll-aboard carry-on, or both   though
a small number of passengers had no luggage. when
all passengers were on board with their luggage stowed
there was very little remaining space in the overhead
bins   essentially none of which was useful for additional
storage. thus, when the airplane was full, so were the
overhead bins; though, there was never a time when a
piece of luggage would not    t somewhere in the aircraft.
since excess luggage would likely a   ect each boarding
method in a similar way the relative ranking of the di   er-
ent methods   in terms of the boarding time   should be
well established by our test.

2

each passenger was given a set of    ve tickets with a
seat assignment and either a passenger number or board-
ing group number (depending upon the method being
tested). the methods were labelled numerically so that
the passengers did not know which method was being
tested. seat assignments were chosen randomly such that
passengers did not sit in the same seat with each method
nor were they deliberately placed in the same location in
the line or in the same boarding group. the only excep-
tions to these rules were three parent-child pairs who al-
ways had two adjacent seats and who were always at the
front of the line, boarding    rst.

finally, passengers used their individual luggage for
each method (they did not swap luggage with other pas-
sengers). one could argue that swapping luggage would
make the test of each method more robust. however, it is
not clear that this is the case as fatigue with boarding the
aircraft several times could mitigate the bene   t of prac-
tice. moreover, the adopted scenario is more representa-
tive of actual airplane boarding as passengers are likely to
have the same or similar bags with them whenever they
travel. also, since passengers were generally not sitting
in the same seats and did not board at the same time with
each method, the luggage that was already stowed in the
overhead bins would be di   erent with each test   adding,
to some extent, the desired randomness.

3. boarding methods

the    ve methods that were tested include: 1) boarding
from the back to the front of the aircraft in a speci   ed or-
der, 2) boarding in four-row blocks, 3) the wilma method,
4) the ste   en method, and 5) random boarding. each of
these methods is described below. figures 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
show the seating assignments or boarding groups.

the back-to-front method had passengers in a speci   c
order starting with the back row window seats, then mid-
dle seats, then aisle seats. this pattern repeated itself
for the rest of the rows moving toward the front of the
plane. a naive guess regarding the most e   cient method
to board an airplane might suggest that this method is op-
timal as it is orderly, boarding passengers from the back
of the plane to the front and from the windows to the
aisle, and it avoids all seat interferences   excepting pri-
ority boarding.

figure 1: back to front seating order.

figure 2: block boarding groups.

3

front13810121197246531front222222222222222222222222333333333333333333333333111111111111111111111111figure 3: wilma boarding groups.

figure 5: random method boarding group.

the block method divided the 12 rows into three groups
of four rows. the back four rows were the    rst group,
followed by the front four rows, and    nishing with the
center four rows. the decision to use this method rather
than boarding in blocks from the back to the front was
admittedly arbitrary, but we believe that the results should
be representative of either method. we also elected to use
three boarding groups rather than four so that each group
would involve a larger number of rows   making it more
similar to what one would expect with a full-size aircraft
and capturing more the potential bene   t of having more
rows available to the passengers in each group.

the wilma method used three boarding groups with
the    rst group being all window seats, the second being
all middle seats, and the third being all aisle seats. within
each group the passengers were essentially random. thus,
this method when followed would avoid passenger seat in-
terferences but would have passenger aisle interferences.
the ste   en method has the passengers lining up in a
prescribed order. this order incorporates in a speci   c way
boarding from the back to the front and from the windows
to the aisle. adjacent passengers in line are sitting two
rows apart from each other in corresponding seats (e.g.

4

figure 4: ste   en method seating order.

front123321123321123321123321123321123321123321123321123321123321123321123321front24181262317115221610284211592732014826219137251front111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111table 1: elapsed time for each boarding method in minutes and seconds.

method

back   front

blocks
wilma
ste   en
random

o   cial extended
time
6:11
6:54
4:13
3:36
4:44

time
6:16
6:56
4:21
3:40
4:48

12f, 10f, 8f, 6f, 4f, 2f). this method attepts to elimi-
nate seat interferences and, as much as possible, aisle in-
terferences while naturally allowing multiple passengers
to stow their luggage simultaneously. the separation be-
tween adjacent passengers provides some space for each
passenger to manipulate their luggage into the bins.

the    nal method was random boarding with a single
boarding group. since each passenger still had an as-
signed seat, this method is not equivalent to the free-
for-all method where passengers select their seats at will.
there is an important distinction between random board-
ing (where the passengers have assigned seats but not an
assigned place in line) and free-for-all boarding. free-
for-all boarding is not random since passengers can make
decisions about where to sit once they observe the state
of the cabin   passengers can choose to avoid an aisle or
seat interference where passengers in the random board-
ing method cannot.

4. results

for each method there are two reported boarding times.
the    rst    o   cial    time is the elapsed time from when the
   rst passenger set foot in the aircraft until the last passen-
ger was seated. the second    extended    time is the elapsed
time from when the passengers were told to proceed to
board until the last passenger was seated. these times dif-
fer by only a few seconds and we report both times here;
tnhe di   erence representing the time it took passengers to
walk approximately six feet and to climb two stairs into
the airplane. table 1 shows the results of the di   erent
boarding methods.

we recognize that there are random    uctuations in the
boarding process and that, in the absence of multiple re-

alizations of the experiment our boarding times are only
estimates of the mean boarding time for each method. it
was not feasible to re-run each boarding method several
times. as the variance in the boarding time comes from
a series of random interferences, a reasonable estimate
of the fractional uncertainty in our estimate of the mean
boarding time is approximately 1/

72     10%.

   

we note that there may be some systematic biases at
play in our results (for example, the quantity and size of
the luggage that our passengers carried may be somewhat
di   erent than what a similar group might take while trav-
eling). this di   erence, and other di   erences are more
likely to a   ect the total length of time each method takes
to board than they are to a   ect the ratios of those times.
thus, while our times may be systematically low or high
compared to what one would experience at a real airport
with real travelers, the ratios of those times should be very
similar in the di   erent environments. regardless, given
the full capacity of both the airplane and the overhead
storage areas, the wide range in passenger ages, and the
random nature of the experiment, we believe that these
potential sources of bias will have a relatively small ef-
fect on the boarding times and that our results for each
method are su   cient for both qualitative discussion and
for rigorous comparisons among them.

5. discussion

the boarding time for back-to-front boarding is an esti-
mate of the e   ect of aisle interferences   which is, in turn,
an estimate of the average luggage loading time for our
sample of passengers. this equivalency between luggage
loading time and the time of an aisle interference is only
applicable in this method because here the aisle interfer-
ence happens at or near the row of the blocked passenger
(we discuss this more below). nominally, back-to-front
boarding has no seat interferences, but it does have 71
aisle interferences. this method took just over 6 minutes
(360 seconds   allowing the balance of the measured time
to account for the time required to walk the length of the
aircraft) which gives roughly 5 seconds per interference.
therefore, an estimate of the e   ective time for a passen-
ger to stow luggage upon arriving at their seat is also 5
seconds   the actual time is likely slightly longer as there
arise situations where multiple passengers stow their lug-
gage simultaneously.

5

the di   erence in boarding time between random
boarding and wilma gives insight into the delay caused by
seat interferences. wilma nominally has no seat interfer-
ences while random boarding does have some. there are
3! = 6 di   erent permutations of the order that passengers
sit in their half-row (the three seats on their side of the
aisle). the number of seat interferences caused by each
permutation ranges from 0 to 3 with a mean of 1.5 (we
will assume for simplicity that the delays for seat inter-
ferences in a particular half-row add linearly rather than,
say, in quadrature). thus, a typical passenger in random
boarding will be involved in 1.5 seat interferences. how-
ever, in relation to the time required to    ll the aircraft, not
all seat interferences are equivalent. only seat interfer-
ences that cause an aisle interference will have a mean-
ingful a   ect on the boarding time   a seat interference at
the back of the airplane will not block a passenger who
is stowing luggage at the front. approximately half of
the seat interferences will cause such an aisle interference
(the id203 that the subsequent passenger has a seat
in a row number greater than or equal to the blocking pas-
senger is actually 1/2 + 1/n, where n is the number of
rows in the aircraft   this subtlety will be important later,
but here we are simply trying to get a rough estimate of
the cost of a seat interference).
between wilma and random boarding we would expect
to have 1/2   1.5   72 = 54 meaningful seat interferences.
the observed di   erence in boarding times was roughly
30 seconds such that the e   ective delay for a seat interfer-
ence, in this case, is just under 1 second. the true delay
is actually twice this quantity since only about half of the
interferences a   ect the boarding time. at    rst glance this
would seem an underestimate for the time it takes for a
seated passenger to stand and switch places with a sec-
ond passenger. however, much of this maneuvering is
done in parallel with the luggage stowing   a passenger
typically informs their neighbor, before their luggage is
completely stowed, that they will need to move past one
another. thus, the two-second delay is primarily for pas-
sengers to    le back into their half-row   a reasonable es-
timate.

taking these e   ects into consideration, one may won-
der why block boarding fared so poorly. block board-
ing allows for some passengers to stow their luggage
simultaneously   eliminating some aisle interferences.
the particular method we employed also eliminates some

6

aisle interferences by having the    rst and second groups
sit in di   erent portions of the aircraft. here is where
the subtle di   erence between random boarding and block
boarding might provide an explanation. in random board-
ing the length of the airplane was 12 rows. in block board-
ing you are essentially boarding three smaller airplanes
of only four rows. thus, the id203 for a particular
seat interference to cause an aisle interference grows from
1/2 + 1/12 = 0.58 to 1/2 + 1/4 = 0.75 which is nearly
30% higher. the number of passengers who can simulta-
neously stow their luggage is at most two, if one assumes
that a passenger needs two rows of space to do so.
in
random boarding this number grows to six simultaneous
passengers   again at most (typically these numbers will
be somewhat less).

thus, if the number of rows in a boarding block is too
small, the result is little di   erent than boarding back to
front. but, now there are a considerable number of seat
interferences, roughly 30% more for our airplane geom-
etry. the extreme case is block boarding by single rows
where the aisle interferences are exacly what one would
get from back to front, but now one expects three seat
interferences at the full     2 second cost of a seat inter-
ference (all seat interfereces a   ect all passengers). while
there is likely some random element to the nearly 45 sec-
ond increase in boarding time from back to front com-
pared with block boarding, the e   ect of seat interferences
alone would account for nearly 40 of those seconds (30%
more than the 30 second di   erence observed between ran-
dom and wilma). clearly, boarding in blocks of four rows
does not help the enplaning process. blocks of 12 rows,
on the other hand, clearly does   the di   erence between
back to front and random boarding (almost 90 seconds)
shows this. said another way, boarding blocks of 12 rows
(our entire airplane) instead of blocks of four rows elimi-
nates the equivalent of 18 passengers stowing their lug-
gage (due to a combination of reducing the number of
aisle interferences and adding a number of seat interfer-
ences). still, in terms of fast boarding times, block board-
ing will likely never be superior to random boarding   
only other considerations would serve to justify its use.

how does the ste   en method compare? in our test, this
method was considerably better than all other methods.
by design the ste   en method has no seat interferences
and 11 aisle interferences   passengers enter in 12 sets,
but the    rst set has no interference preceeding it. yet,

even in the controlled environment of our experiment, this
design was not fully implemented. six passengers (those
with small children) boarded    rst, some passengers will
sit in the wrong seat. in short, there is still randomness to
the process. this randomness alone cannot explain why
the ste   en method did not board in a single minute as
one might estimate from eleven aisle interferences of    ve
seconds each.

the primary answer lies in a remaining, characteris-
tic timescale in the boarding process   the time it takes to
walk the length of the airplane. this last part is mani-
fest in the nature of the aisle interferences. for back-to-
front boarding, the aisle interference corresponds to a 5
second wait for the preceeding passenger, after which the
blocked passenger can immediately begin stowing their
luggage. for random boarding a typical aisle interference
corresponds to the same 5 second wait, but now it is, on
average, in the middle of the aircraft. this wait is fol-
lowed by a walk of roughly half of the remaining distance
to the rear of the cabin to the average location of the pas-
senger   s row. the aisle interferences in the back to front
method are less severe as there is no subsequent walk. in
the ste   en method the aisle interferences are of the worst
sort. they occur at the front of the airplane with the entire
length of the airplane to traverse once the interference has
passed.

if one assumes that it takes roughly one second to walk
past each row, then the ste   en method has nearly 2.5 min-
utes of built-in delays just from walking. add the luggage
loading time of    ve seconds at the start of each delay and
you are beyond three minutes. add the seat interferences
from the parent/child pairs and an estimate consistent with
the observed boarding time of roughly 3.5 minutes takes
shape.

from the ste   en method to the wilma method one
trades an increase in the number of aisle interferences for
aisle interferences that are less severe (the result of this
trade, however, still increases the boarding time). then,
from wilma to random boarding one adds seat interfer-
ences (for the bene   t of simplicity and perhaps some un-
known amount of customer satisfaction). block boarding,
   nally, adds cost to the seat interferences, making them
relatively worse in terms of the time they consume as a
larger fraction of the seat interferences will cause aisle in-
terferences.

we note that the estimates we have derived for the time

consumed by walking the aisle, seat and aisle interfer-
ences, and luggage stowing are all estimates based upon
the observed boarding times of the methods. they were
made in an e   ort to properly interpret the results in terms
of known factors in the boarding process. a more rigor-
ous study of each of these quantities is beyond the scope
of this work, but would serve to provide more under-
standing the interplay between all of the factors, including
some not discussed here, that contribute to the boarding
time.

6. conclusions

we have seen experimentally that there is a marked dif-
ference in the time required to board an aircraft depending
upon the boarding method used. the evidence strongly
supports the heuristic argument from ste   en (2008a) that
methods that parallelize the boarding process by more ef-
   ciently utilizing the aisle (having more passengers stow
their luggage simultaneously) will board more quickly
than those that do not. the relative bene   t of the applica-
tion of this theory will grow with the length of the aircraft.
here, we used a 12-row mock airplane, but a more typical
airplane with twice that number of rows will gain more by
the implementation of parallelized boarding methods.

how this improvement scales with the cabin length is
di   erent for each method. for the ste   en method, the
bene   t will scale almost linearly. if the airplane is twice
as long, the time savings will be nearly twice as much
since the density of luggage-stowing passengers will re-
main the same and the boarding will still be maximally
parallel. for wilma and random boarding the bene   t will
not be as strong since the bene   ts of parallel boarding are
randomly distributed along the length of the cabin instead
of being regularly distributed. for block boarding the
bene   t will come almost exclusively through an increased
size of the boarding group (more rows per group).

given the observed boarding times, the wilma method
boards faster than block boarding (with four-row blocks)
by a factor of almost 1.7 while the ste   en method boards
faster by almost a factor of 2. an accurate estimate of the
time it would take to board an airplane two or three times
as long would take a more detailed study of the relative
interplay of the relevant timescales of the problem   the
time to stow luggage (i.e., the time consumed by an aisle
interference), the time consumed by seat interferences,

7

bazargan, m., 2007. a id135 approach for
aircraft boarding strategy. european journal of opera-
tional research 183 (1), 394   411.

landeghem, h. v., beuselinck, a., 2002. reducing pas-
senger boarding time in airplanes: a simulation based
approach. european journal of operational research
142 (2), 294     308.

nagel, k., ferrari, p., 2005. the secrets to faster boarding.

international airport review 3.

nyquist, d. c., mcfadden, k. l., 2008. a study of the air-
line boarding problem. journal of air transport man-
agement 14 (4), 197     204.

ste   en, j. h., 2008a. optimal boarding method for air-
line passengers. journal of air transport management
14 (3), 146     150.

ste   en, j. h., 2008b. a statistical mechanics model
for free-for-all airplane passenger boarding. american
journal of physics 76, 1114   1119.

van den briel, m. h. l., villalobos, j. r., hogg, g. l.,
lindemann, t., mule, a. v., 2005. america west air-
lines develops e   cient boarding strategies. inter-
faces 35 (3), 191   201.

and the time required to walk the length of the airplane.
nevertheless, even if one simply doubles the boarding
times observed here the savings of the ste   en method
over the block method would be nearly seven minutes.
this savings could be as much as $110,000,000 annually
per carrier   well over a billion dollars for the industry   
and likely could be more given the parallel nature of the
boarding process. indeed, a test with a longer aircraft may
show surprising results in this regard.

some practical impedements arise when implementing
the ste   en method. however, it was fairly easy to do in
our experiment, and some carriers already have the cus-
tomers line up in a speci   ed order (e.g., southwest air-
lines and, more recently, a trial by american) showing
that the challenge is surmountable. other considerations
such as companion travelers are also fairly simple to acco-
modate in the context of the ste   en method and, if done
well, would have a marginal, if not negligible, e   ect on
the boarding time.
(speci   cally, as long as paired pas-
sengers are not seated near the front of the aircraft where
the primary aisle interferences materialize, they will have
a few additional seconds   on average half of the time
required to walk the length of the cabin   to stow their
luggage and be seated.) while the cost savings of the
ste   en, or other optimized boarding method, may not be
completely realizable due to maintenance and out   tting
time, the motivation to reduce the time required for these
other, necessary activities would be increased if passenger
boarding was removed as an e   ective limitation.

acknowledgements

we wish to thank the sta    at hotchkiss industries for
their work in preparing and executing this experiment. we
also wish to thank the many participants who devoted the
greater part of a day to the project   their absence would
have been severely missed.

references

bachmat, e., berend, d., sapir, l., skiena, s., stol-
yarov, n., jul. 2006. analysis of aeroplane boarding via
spacetime geometry and random matrix theory. journal
of physics a mathematical general 39, l453   l459.

8

