june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

1
1
0
2

 

y
a
m
5
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
5
0
5

.

5
0
1
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

eigenvector localization as a tool to study small

communities in online social networks

franti  sek slanina

institute of physics,

academy of sciences of the czech republic,

na slovance 2, cz-18221 praha, czech republic

slanina@fzu.cz

zden  ek konop   asek

center for theoretical study,

charles university in prague / academy of sciences of the czech republic,

jilsk  a 1, praha, czech republic

zdenek@konopasek.net

we present and discuss a mathematical procedure for identi   cation of small    commu-
nities    or segments within large bipartite networks. the procedure is based on spectral
analysis of the matrix encoding network structure. the principal tool here is localiza-
tion of eigenvectors of the matrix, by means of which the relevant network segments
become visible. we exempli   ed our approach by analyzing the data related to product
reviewing on amazon.com. we found several segments, a kind of hybrid communities of
densely interlinked reviewers and products, which we were able to meaningfully interpret
in terms of the type and thematic categorization of reviewed items. the method provides
a complementary approach to other ways of community detection, typically aiming at
identi   cation of large network modules.

keywords: social network; random matrix; internet

1. introduction

the complexity of our societies is studied by social analysts in various ways. qualita-
tive inquiries and case studies usually put little emphasis on formalized description,
partly to avoid oversimpli   cation, or even trivialization of the phenomena under
study. on the other side, sophisticated mathematical procedures are increasingly
used in order to grasp complexity in a speci   c way, as a formalized property of
larger systems. one of the branches of the latter stream is represented by the anal-
ysis of social networks using mathematical theory of graphs. our approach adheres
precisely to this    eld of research and yet, it follows slightly di   erent direction than
most e   orts in contemporary network analysis.

the purpose of this paper is twofold. first, we want to present a speci   c solution
to a rather standard problem of social network analysis, which is identi   cation of
communities within complex networks. second, we want to discuss some alternative
perspectives on the concept of    social network   . we suggest that our method might

1

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

2 localization in social networks

provide a suitable tool for empirical research in respective directions, enabling the
analyst to determine those    hot spots    within the network that usually escape
attention.

to make the wider methodological context of our paper clearer, let us start with
some notes on networks and network analysis in contemporary sociology. the use
of the term    network    in contemporary sociology vary from loose metaphors [17] to
rather speci   c and technical meanings [23, 83], compatible with the network science
as understood in mathematics or physics.

social network analysis has a complex history, with roots involving the socio-
metric analysis of moreno in the beginning of 20th century, the harvard researchers
of the 1930s and 1940s who studied interpersonal con   gurations and cliques and,
   nally, the group of anthropologists based in manchester who, roughly in the same
time, instead of emphasizing integration and cohesion as their predecessors, focused
on con   ict and change, see [83], pp. 7-37. in 1960s, a key turn to mathematization
occurred, which gave this    eld a new impulse and high ambitions. today, encour-
aged by the rise of interest in networks in other scienti   c disciplines, social network
analysis is sometimes seen as an approach that may entirely rede   ne the social
sciences, while integrating them into a broader interdisciplinary research program
[19]. formalized analytical procedures hugely contributed to the fact that social
network analysis has become    rm basis for social science discussions [90]. how-
ever, integration of mathematical analytic thinking with sociological imagination is
an intricate task. as noted by [31], the application of formalized methods of social
network analysis is often marked by neglecting substantive and theoretical sociolog-
ical consequences. also, despite the growing popularity of mathematical modeling,
qualitative, or ethnographic studies of    network sociality    [92] keep their relevance,
hand in hand with quantitative approaches.

given this complicated background, our aim, in this paper, is rather modest. we
want to introduce and illustrate a new mathematical method for identi   cation of
small parts of complex networks with higher level of commonalities and for studying
their basic formal properties. as an example and possible    eld of application we
have chosen networks of product reviewing on the amazon.com portal. here, the
simplest possible ties structuring the network are the connections established by
two reviews written on the same product. in other words, what reviewers may
have in common is the product reviewed by them. the con   gurations when one
product, e.g., a book or a cd, is reviewed by two or more reviewers are frequent,
of course, and not much special. but if the same reviewers are similarly connected
via some other items too, the situation gets more exciting. we can assume that
network segments with higher density of such links represent small communities of
reviewers with similar interests. our    rst and main objective is to    nd these small
communities.

identi   cation of such small-size groupings has always been one of the key tasks
in social network analysis. identi   cation of these network segments is an interest-
ing empirical    nding in itself. other times, however, the need to focus on smaller

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

3

network segments is rather methodological than substantial or theoretical: for in-
stance, when david and pinch [22] analyzed the phenomenon of review plagiarism
on amazon.com, they had to    localize    the phenomena in order to make it better
graspable in detail. thus, they had to reduce their sample while focusing on those
segments of the vast amount of data available in which reviewed products were
   somewhat similar to one another    and thus vulnerable to    recycling    practices
they were interested in. this is a characteristic situation: complex networks, in-
cluding the social ones, are quite often huge, only hardly analyzable in details, with
respect to local deviations or little extremities. this is especially true for on-line
networks. when studying internet-related network structures, analysts can quickly
become overloaded with data and it is di   cult to tell what exactly to look at. the
urgent question becomes: how to locate tiny islands of relevance in the ocean of
data archived on the internet? we o   er a possible mathematical method for pre-
cisely such a task     a more    exible and background-sensitive one (a    softer    one,
in a way) than those already described and used in the    eld.

we should also stress at this point that our task di   ers from the well-studied
problem of splitting the network into several modules, which may perhaps overlap,
but as an ensemble, they cover the network entirely. this is the case in metabolic
networks, to mention just one example [72, 46]. in our case, we want to focus on a
few    hot spots   , small communities of interest within the network, leaving all the
rest behind.

2. reviewing networks on amazon.com as a sociological problem

before demonstrating the mathematical procedures, let us also brie   y mention some
sociological contexts of the chosen example. sociologists have pointed out the in-
creasing importance of the symbolic content of contemporary economics, which is
often associated, among others, with users    or consumers    active involvement in the
complex processes of product evaluation, quali   cation, and formation [2, 59]. the
role of consumers is particularly enhanced by the internet and by the ways computer
technologies shape social networks [15].

a speci   c and signi   cant part of these processes has been recognized as    peer-
production of relevance/accreditation    [8], p. 75 or simply as    reputational econ-
omy    [22]. by reviewing or commenting items in on-line shops, classifying and
rating them, individual consumers become co-producers of coordinates for others   
economic decision making. they engage in a complex action that cannot be simply
grasped in purely economic terms. as noted by [62], p. 322, spaces of e-commerce
are characteristic by countless devices creating diversity of forms of encounter be-
tween products and consumers [93].

user reviews and comments, for instance, not only serve the purposes of the
seller, but also the consumer community, while simultaneously being the means for
identity building of reviewers themselves [37]. in-depth study of all these complex
phenomena seems crucial for better understanding of contemporary    technological

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

4 localization in social networks

economies    [6].

what kind of groupings are we interested in when we try to locate segments
of reviewers connected by shared reviewed products? we might be tempted to talk
about virtual communities. but these would not be    virtual communities    in the
usual sense [78, 91]; and they would not be    online social networks    as typically
imagined by social scientists. both these concepts characteristically refer to groups
of people who directly communicate to each other with the help of computer net-
works     i. e., who know (about) each other and interact by means of on-line forums,
instant messaging, or facebook. our groups of amazon.com reviewers represent a
slightly di   erent kind of entities, though. these people usually do not communicate
by addressing each other and quite often they even do not know each other. they
do not belong to the group by virtue of intentional interaction with the others,
but    merely    by doing similar things in a relatively uncoordinated way: writing
reviews on speci   c products. if [45, 44] drew our attention to the importance of
   weak ties    in social networks, i.e., to the signi   cance of ordinary informal acquain-
tances (in comparison to family ties and formal hierarchies), we could speak here
of a kind of    ultra-weak ties   . these ties are    virtual    in the sense that they are
not    real enough    in the usual sociological meaning; yet, they are materialized and
articulated - although not by the reviewers themselves only. we can clearly see the
connections on the amazon.com web pages: the reviews of these people are listed
together, accompanying the respective item in the catalog. moreover, the review-
ers do not become members of this community completely unintentionally, but by
means of quite intentional and personal act of assessing the product and writing
the review. they create the community by highly mediated interactions, as if    by
the way   , together and via the technology of on-line shopping.

in the following section we present mathematical tools for identi   cation, repre-
sentation and elementary description of precisely such communities. the proposed
procedures may have a value especially in relation to subsequent sociological anal-
ysis of these local anomalies, as its precondition.

3. finding small communities in networks

3.1. motivation

the problem of identi   cation parts of the network bearing some relevant struc-
tural information, can be relatively easily formulated in mathematical terms. the
methodological problem is, which one of the variety of possible mathematical for-
mulations of community detection is suitable for given purpose. let us stress that
we neither aim at improving the existing schemes nor present an algorithm which
should compete with the established ones. instead, we are bringing an alternative
scheme which reveals structures, not covered by other schemes of community detec-
tion. that is why we not only present a description of the method and its application
to one real-world example, but also spend time putting it into a wider context of
sociological thinking.

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

5

3.2. background

for a long time, the standard way of mathematical modeling of social networks [90,
23] was the    classical    theory of random graphs [11, 24] initiated by the work by
erd  os and r  enyi [32]. however, in the last decade a new class of networks became
studied and the name    complex networks    became common denomination for them
[4, 1, 88, 27, 12, 28, 70]. compared with the    classical    models of random networks,
they grasp much better the networks found in reality and at the same time their
models are much more involved than bare random dropping of edges as in the
erd  os-r  enyi model. the most immediate characteristics common to the complex
networks is their degree distributions with power-law tails [4].

the strong inhomogeneity of complex networks, implicit in their degree distri-
bution, changes many aspects of their behavior. in the context of our work, new
approaches for    nding the communities become relevant. while the methods for
determining cliques, k-cliques and motifs [90, 23] work well if the zero-hypothesis
on the network structure is the erd  os-r  enyi random graph, methods better suited
for complex networks were developed [54, 33, 68, 69, 77, 76, 72, 40, 16, 46, 39, 5, 57,
38, 82, 61, 58, 5, 56]. the central quantity for majority of them is the modularity
measure q, which is to be made maximal. this is achieved by various optimization
algorithms.

here we will rely on the method of describing the global properties of networks
using the spectral theory of graphs [20]. it deals with eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
various matrices representing the graph structure, which are the adjacency matrix,
laplacian and more.
it was already used for    nding clusters or communities in
networks through the properties of eigenvectors corresponding to the second largest
eigenvalue [67, 16, 21, 25]. in one step it gives the best partitioning of the network
into two modules and repeating the algorithm recursively, the communities are
found. our approach is di   erent, though. it is similar in spirit to the analysis of
covariance matrices in    nance [73, 75], where economic sectors are attributed to
eigenvectors corresponding to the second, the third, etc. largest eigenvalue.

the    rst level of understanding spectral properties of a random matrix comprises
the knowledge of the density of eigenvalues. the second involves the localization
properties of the eigenvectors. it is the latter that is central for our approach.

let us say    rst a few words on the eigenvalue density. spectra of    classical   
random graphs, like the erd  os-r  enyi model, are closely related to    classical    models
of random matrices [64]. the typical shape of the eigenvalue density is the wigner
semi-circle with sharp edges, with the largest eigenvalue split far o    from the bulk
of all other eigenvalues. the    rst complication arising in the spectrum of a random
graph is the sparseness of the adjacency matrix, which leads to the emergence of
lifschitz tails. this appears already in the erd  os-r  enyi model. despite considerable
e   ort [79], the lifschitz tail in er graph is still not known in all details. asymptotic
formula was obtained by several approaches, showing that the density of states is
non-zero at arbitrarily large eigenvalues and it decays faster than any power law

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

6 localization in social networks

[79, 84].

it was soon realized that complex networks, characterized by power-law degree
distributions, have also non-standard spectral properties [34, 42, 29, 30, 33, 71,
53, 35, 51, 36, 85, 21, 14, 94, 26, 86]. first, there is a cusp in the middle part
of the density of eigenvalues, and second, perhaps more importantly, the tail of
the eigenvalue density seems to be described by a power law [34, 42]. numerical
diagonalization on toy models [29, 30] as well as some analytical estimates con   rmed
power-law tails in the density of states. the replica trick [80, 65], as well as the
cavity method [30, 81] were later adapted for scale free networks. it was found that
the spectrum has a power-law tail characterized by the exponent 2       1 related to
the degree exponent    of the network. further improvements of the method were
introduced recently [50, 10].

as we shall see, our method is similar to those used in the study of covariance
matrices of stock-market    uctuations [41, 55, 73, 74, 75, 89, 3, 48, 13]. they are
modeled as random matrices of the form m m t , where m is a random rectangular
matrix. the density of states has the mar  cenko-pastur form [63] with sharp edges,
which are smeared out into lifschitz tails if the matrix is sparse [66].

most attention was paid to the states in the tail, i. e. located beyond the edge of
the mar  cenko-pastur density and below the maximum eigenvalue, which is always
split o   . these states are supposed to carry the non-trivial information about the
stock market and, indeed, the shape of the corresponding eigenvectors was used to
identify business sectors. it was supposed that the eigenvectors were localized on
items within speci   c sector [43, 75, 52]. more sophisticated approaches were also
developed [89].

our method owes largely to the spectral analysis of covariance matrices. how-
ever, we improve these approaches by systematic use of the quantitative measure of
localization of the eigenvectors, which is the inverse participation ratio. in an intu-
itive manner, similar approach was already used in the analysis of gene coexpression
data [49]. within this approach, we do not aim at factoring the entire network into
some number of modules, or communities, which may or may not be overlapping,
but in any case covering, as an ensemble, the whole network. instead, we want to
   nd small parts of the network which di   er structurally from the rest. we may also
describe our approach as    contrast coloring    of the network, which makes certain
relevant parts visible against the irrelevant background.

3.3. spectral analysis of matrices encoding the structure

our analysis will be devoted to bipartite graphs. there are two types of nodes,
making up sets r and i. anticipating our application to the amazon.com network,
we think of members of r as reviewers and members of i as items to be reviewed.
all information on the network structure is contained in the adjacency matrix m
with elements mri     {0, 1}. the out-degree of node r     r is kr = pi mri, the
in-degree of the node i     i is ki = pr mri.

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

7

in bipartite graph, the spectral properties are deduced from the contracted ma-
trices b = m   m t and c = m t   m . the interpretation of these matrices is obvious;
e. g. brs tells us how many neighbors the nodes r and s have in common. similar
construction is used frequently in bipartite networks. as an example, let us cite the
network of tag co-occurrence in the analysis of collaborative tagging systems [18]
or recommendation algorithms investigated in [95].

in order to partially separate the e   ects of the network structure from the in   u-
ence of degree distribution, we rescale the matrix elements by the product of square
roots of the out-degrees. this way, we get the matrix

ars =

brs   kr ks

(1)

with all diagonal elements equal to 1. we can also be more explicit and write

ars = (cid:0)pi mri msi(cid:1)/q(cid:0)pi mri(cid:1)(cid:0)pi msi(cid:1). obviously, the matrix a is symmetric.
the matrix a is then diagonalized. let us see what information can be extracted
from the eigenvalues and eigenvectors. first, for any square n    n matrix d encod-
n trdk as density of circles
ing the structure of a graph we can interpret the traces 1
of length k. this number is equal to the k-th moment of the density of eigenvalues
of d. in our case, the role of d is assumed by the contracted matrix b and the k-th
moment of b expresses the density of cycles of length 2k on the bipartite graph.
if we use the matrix a instead, the moments of the spectrum are related to the
density of weighted cycles. each time the cycle goes through the vertex r     r,
it assumes the weight 1/kr. therefore, cycles connecting vertexes with large de-
gree are counted with lower weight. this is just what we want here: to put accent
on peripheral, less-connected areas of the network, rather than on the hubs. if we
did not rescale the matrix as in (1), the weight of the hubs, or strongly-connected
nodes in general, would overshadow the major part of the network, where the small
communities may lie hidden.

we expect that the spectrum has power-law tail. indeed, it will be con   rmed in
the speci   c example of amazon.com, which we shall show later. the power-law tail
implies that the density of cycles beyond certain length diverges. in terms of the
limit n         it means that the number of such cycles increases faster than linearly
with n . the exponent of the power-law tail tells us what is the threshold for the
cycle length, beyond which the cycles are anomalously frequent compared to the
erd  os-r  enyi graph.

what does all this mean for the problem of    nding small compact communities?
if we for example use the method of cliques or k-cliques, we tacitly assume that the
   background    network does not contain many of these cliques by pure chance. but
if, for example, the tail of the spectrum of d has exponent 4, the third moment
diverges, which means that there are extremely many triangles. no triangle, or
community of size 3, can therefore be considered as informationally relevant. that
is why we consider the information on the spectrum of the network an important
auxiliary information.

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

8 localization in social networks

the new algorithm we propose for    nding small compact communities relies on
the properties of the eigenvectors. let us denote e   r the r-th element of the eigen-
vector of the matrix a, corresponding to the eigenvalue   . to study the localization,
we need to calculate the inverse participation ratio (ipr) de   ned as

q   1(  ) =

n

x

r=1

(e   r)4

(2)

where id172 pn

r=1(e   r)2 = 1 is assumed.

while ipr says quantitatively to which extent an eigenvector is localized, this
information alone is not su   cient, if we want to draw the distinction between lo-
calized and extended states. first, it makes no sense to ask, if a particular vector
is localized, as opposed to extended, or not. what does make sense, however, is
the question whether the states around certain eigenvalue are localized. the way
to establish that fact is by    nite-size analysis. indeed, if n is the dimension of the
vector space we work with, then

q   1(  )    

      
   

o(1),

n         localized state
o(cid:16)n    1(cid:17), n         extended state .

(3)

second, also the shape of the density of eigenvalues changes with the system size.
when we increase n , the spectrum broadens. in the textbook example of erd  os-
r  enyi graph, the spectrum has sharp band edges. the edge of er spectrum moves as
n 1/2 when n grows and if we compare the ipr at di   erent system sizes, we must
measure the eigenvalues relative to the band edge. so, to compare the behavior
at di   erent sizes, we take random subset of the network, containing nsub nodes.
typically, we choose nsub = n/2. then, we plot the density d(  ) of eigenvalues for
both original network and the density dsub(  ) for the random subset. the densities
are rescaled by the factor s, the value of which is found empirically so that the
data for d(  ) and dsub(1 + (       1)s) overlap as much as possible. the form of
this rescaling involves the shift of the eigenvalues by 1, because the matrix a has
spectrum centered around the value    = arr = 1. with s found, we plot the ipr
for the network and the subset, with the same rescaling as used for the eigenvalues
density. the regions, where we observe that q   1(  ) remains roughly the same for
the network and its subset, are the candidate areas where the localized states are
to be found.

we continue the procedure by determining the eigenvectors with largest q   1
within the areas of localized states. the elements of these vectors tell us what nodes
of the network belong to the small community. to this end, we    x a threshold t
and retain only those nodes r     r for which the elements exceed the threshold in
absolute value, |e   r| > t . we do not propose any exact method for    xing t . for
the sake of consistency, t must be chosen so that the number of nodes retained is
roughly 1/q   1. in practical applications we observed the number of retained nodes
when t was gradually decreased from t = 1. at certain crossover value of t we saw

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

9

that the number of nodes suddenly started increasing substantially to much larger
values than 1/q   1. so, we    xed t somewhat below this crossover. we believe that
this procedure could be made automatic by a software implementation, but we did
not do that.

let us make an important remark at this point. clearly, we can    nd some
localized states also in a randomized version of the network. these states are results
of pure chance and do not bear signi   cant information. therefore, we cannot exclude
that also in the true empirical network, some of the localized states occur just
accidentally and thus some of the clusters found are spurious. the choice of the
threshold t only cannot discriminate between the true and the spurious clusters.
however, looking at the dependence of ipr on eigenvalue for the true and the
randomized network (as will be seen later in fig. 4) we can see the regions where
ipr is large and di   ers markedly between true and randomized networks. the
localized states found in these regions (in fig. 4 it is near the lower edge of the
density of states) correspond to clusters that are non-random and do bear relevant
information.

this way we    nd those vertexes r     r, which form the community cr = {r     r :
|e   r| > t}. next, we proceed by    nding those i     i which are connected to them.
here we can distinguish two levels. first, a vertex i     i can be connected to at least
two di   erent vertexes from cr. then, we say that it belongs to the connectors of
the community, c con
i = {i     i :    r, s     cr : r 6= s     msi = mri = 1}. further, those
i     i which are connected to just one vertex of cr form a more weakly bound part
of the community, which we call cloud, c cloud
:     mri = 1}.
we can explicitly see the asymmetry in constructing the community. this is due
to the fact that we focused on the diagonalization of the contraction matrix acting
in the space r. the procedure can be, of course, performed also in the opposite
direction, diagonalizing the contraction on i. both ways are equally justi   ed on
the formal level. the choice should be dictated by practical reasons and by the
interpretation we want to draw from the data in any speci   c application.

= {i     i :    r     cr\c con

i

i

to sum up, our procedure for    nding small communities in bipartite networks

consists in the following steps.

1. diagonalize the matrix a, ars = (cid:0)pi mri msi(cid:1)/q(cid:0)pi mri(cid:1)(cid:0)pi msi(cid:1). the out-

put is the density of states d(  ) and the inverse participation ratio q   1(  ).

2. do the same for random subset of the network, containing half of the nodes,
   nd the proper rescaling factor s, so that rescaled density of states for the network
and the subset coincide. by rescaling the ipr using the same factor s, determine
the regions, in which localized states are to be found.

3. within the localized region,    nd the eigenvectors with highest ipr.

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

10 localization in social networks

4. for each of the eigenvectors found, determine the threshold t and establish
the set cr of nodes r, for which |e  r| > t . this set is the projection of the commu-
nity to the set r.

5. find the connector and cloud components of the community on the side of the
set i.

4. an example: reviewing networks on amazon.com

4.1. basic structural features

the e-commerce site amazon.com is one of the oldest and best known on the www.
it has a very rich internal structure, but the user usually sees only a small part
relevant to the service requested in a particular moment. as already announced, we
shall investigate one aspect of the amazon.com trading, namely the network made
up of connections between the items to be sold and the reviewers who have written
reports on these items.

this network is a bipartite graph, with items i = 1, 2, . . . , nitm on one side
and reviewers r = 1, 2, . . . , nrev on the other side. the sets of vertexes r and i
introduced in the methodical section above, correspond to the sets of reviewers and
items, respectively.

the reviews written are edges connecting these two sets. the structure of the
network can be uniquely described by the matrix m , where the element mri equals
1 if the reviewer r wrote a review on item i, and 0 otherwise.

the data were downloaded using a very simple crawler in the period from 28
july 2005 to 27 september 2005. first, a list of total nall = 1 714 512 reviewers was
downloaded; at that time the list containing all amazon reviewers was accessible
through the web. (it is no more so.) the list was naturally ordered by the rank ama-
zon assigns to each reviewer. on average, reviewers with higher rank have written
more reviews, but there are exceptions. for example, at the time of data collection,
the no. 1 reviewer, harriet klausner, had written 9581 reviews, while the no. 2,
lawrance m. bernabo, 10603 reviews. this suggests that it is not only quantity
but also quality which counts when amazon ranks their reviewers. we do not touch
here the obvious question how the most proli   c reviewers do manage reading and
reviewing several books per day, throughout many years. as we investigate only
structural features here, these problems are left aside.

in the next step, we went through the reviewers    list, from the top rank down-
wards. we looked only at about 105    rst reviewers and stopped there, as we con-
sidered the sample su   ciently representative. the remaining reviewers are only
occasional writers, contributing by one or at most a few reviews. for each reviewer
we found all reviews written by her or him and registered the name of the item
reviewed (mostly books and cd   s, of course, but in general all kinds of goods do
appear) as well as some other details about the review. in total, we examined 99 622

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

11

reviewers who wrote 2 036 091 reviews on 645 056 items.

4.2. degree distributions

the simplest and most accessible local property of the network is the degree dis-
tribution. in the list of reviewers we put down also the reported number of reviews
written by the particular person. we neglected the possible error in this number
due to various inconsistencies. we believe that the random discrepancies between
the number of reviews reported and number of reviews which can actually be found
in the system do not in   uence the statistics in any signi   cant measure. we show the
distribution as out-degree distribution in fig. 1. we can observe clear power-law
dependence except for the few highest degrees. the exponent    tted is   out     2.2.
similarly we can extract the in-degree distribution from the list of reviews. the
statistics of the number of reviews per item is also shown in fig.1 and a power-law
dependence is found again. the corresponding exponent is now   in     2.35.

the power distribution is by no means surprising, in view of the vast literature
on complex networks. the data provide a clear check that amazon.com also belongs
to the class of networks with power-law degree distribution.

4.3. distribution of eigenvalues

now we are in a position to calculate the contraction matrix a acting on the set
of reviewers, and diagonalize it. as an additional study, we compare the results
with randomized version of the reviewer-item network. this way we discriminate
between the in   uence of the network structure and genuinely random factors.

to this end, we reshu   e the edges in the reviewer-item graph, while keeping
the degrees of all vertexes unchanged. the matrix m is replaced by m r and,
correspondingly, the matrix a is replaced by ar. again, we can write ar
rs =
(cid:0)pi m r
is the order sequence. as we showed in the last section, it obeys a power law, so the
features found in analyzing ar are entirely due to power-law degree distribution,
but without further structural details.

si(cid:1)/   kr ks. the only information on the network structure retained here

ri m r

we diagonalize the matrices a and ar. their eigenvalues   1       2     . . .       n
are accumulated around the value    = 1, which corresponds to the uniform diagonal
value of both the true and the randomized matrices. the distributions are plotted
in figures 2, and 3. let us describe now what we can see here.

in fig. 2 we plot the histogram of the eigenvalues of the matrix a. most of them
fall within the interval        [0, 3], with sharp maximum in the eigenvalue density
at    = 1. the eigenvalues density is much smaller for    > 3 and we show their
positions as separate ticks. although the notions    bulk    and    tail    are not very
precise here, we shall use them pragmatically, calling bulk the part with    . 3 and
tail the part with    & 3.

in fig. 2 we can also see the spectrum of the randomized matrix ar. the power-
law distribution of degrees is preserved. in the spectrum, we can observe certain

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

12 localization in social networks

remarkable changes. in the bulk of the density of states, as shown in the inset of
fig. 2, the spectrum of the reshu   ed network lacks the characteristic tip at the
value    = 1 and its shape at the lower end of the spectrum is quite di   erent. most
importantly, a sharp band edge develops. on the other hand, at the upper tail of
the density of states, the changes are of minor importance.

1

in fig. 3 we can compare the behavior of integrated density of states, d>(  ) =
pi,  i>  
n in the region of large eigenvalues. for the original matrix a we observe
a power-law decay in the tail d>(  )     (      1)      with        2. for the matrix ar the
tail is again quite reasonably    tted on a power law, but with larger exponent. let us
recall that the divergence of the moments of the eigenvalue density is related to the
statistics of cycles on the network. for the reshu   ed network, the divergence occurs
at higher moments, therefore at cycle lengths longer than in the original network.
this e   ect seems to be a tiny one, but this is just a subtle structural di   erence
which goes beyond the bare degree distribution. in short, the amazon network has
many more short loops than how many could be expected knowing only its degree
sequence. this suggests the presence of small self-reinforcing communities. although
we do not see them yet at this stage, we can perceive their existence through the
density of states of the matrix a.

interestingly, similar conclusions about small communities were reached in the
study of collaborative tagging systems [18], where two-node correlations were calcu-
lated in order to estimate the quantity of non-randomness, or semantic information
content.

4.4. localization

having investigated the eigenvalues, let us now turn to the properties of the eigen-
vectors. we show in fig. 4 how the ipr depends on the eigenvalue. for the matrix
a we can see larger localization around the center of the spectrum at    = 1. farther
from the center the localization is weaker, but it increases again at the tails, more
strongly at the lower tail, while more gradually at the upper tail. note also some
isolated highly localized states in the bulk of the eigenvalue distribution.

now we compare the results with the random subset of nsub = 5000. we found
that the density of eigenvalues coincides very well if we choose the scaling factor

s = 3   2 = 3pn/nsub. with the same scaling we plot the ipr in fig. 5. we can see

that the absence of a clearcut band edge is complemented by the absence of any
region of localized states at the upper end of the spectrum. the lower end does show
localized states, though. therefore, the candidates for compact communities are to
be found close to the lower end of the spectrum. in the next section we describe
what we have found there.

5. finding and interpreting the communities

as we have said, the most localized states are the candidates for small and densely
interlinked communities of reviewers. we counted as members of the community

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

13

1

0.1

)
0
1
/
k
(
n
p

i

,
)
k
(
t
u
o
p

10   2

10   3

10   4

10   5

10   6

1

10

100
k

103

104

fig. 1. degree distribution of the bipartite reviewer-product network on amazon.com. circles
indicate the data for out-degree (reviews per reviewer), triangles for in-degree (reviews per item).
the latter data are shifted rightwards by one decade for better visibility. the lines are the power
laws     k   2.2 (dashed line) and     k   2.35 (solid line).

)
  
(

d

1.5

1

0.5

0

1.5

1

0.5

)
  
(

d

0

0.5

1

   1.5

86420

10

14

16

18

20

22

12
  

fig. 2. distribution of eigenvalues of the reviewer-reviewer matrix. the size of the segment is
n = 10000. for    < 3 the distribution is plotted as a histogram, while the larger eigenvalues,
   > 3 are shown as individual vertical ticks. the largest eigenvalue is indicated by the circle. in
the inset we show the detail of the central part of the same plot. also in the inset, the dashed
(green in color) line is the distribution of eigenvalues of the matrix obtained by reshu   ing the
reviewer-item graph.

only those reviewers, whose element in the eigenvector was larger than a threshold,
|e   r| > t . the value of the threshold t was found by trial-and-error, so that all
relevant nodes, on which localization appears, were kept, while the remaining ones,

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

14 localization in social networks

)
  
(
>
d

1

0.1

10   2

10   3

10   4

0.1

1
       1

10

fig. 3. detail of the upper part of the distribution of eigenvalues. the behavior is observed using
the integrated density of eigenvalues. circles correspond to the original reviewer-reviewer matrix
with n = 10000, the triangles correspond to the same matrix subject to permutation of all its
elements. the full line is the power     (       1)   2, the dashed line is the power     (       1)   3.4.

)
  
(
1
   
q

1

0.1

10   2

10   3

10   4

0

1

2

  

3

fig. 4. inverse participation ratio for the reviewer-reviewer matrix with n = 10000 (   ), and the

same for matrix obtained by reshu   ing the reviewer-item graph (+). each point denotes the ipr
for the eigenvector corresponding to the indicated eigenvalue   .

interpreted as a noisy neighborhood, were left out. this adjustment of thresholds
also indicates that the borders of the communities found in this way are not sharp.
in our set of 104 reviewers, the number of communities which can be considered
as well-localized is about     10. we were able to explicitly draw and interpret 7
communities. with average size of the communities around 6 people, the fraction of
reviewers in small compact communities can be estimated to about 0.5 per cent. in

june

2,

slaninakonopasek100920

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slanina and konop  asek

15

1

0.1

)
  
(
1
   
q

10   2

10   3

10   4

0

0.5

1.5

1
2
(       1) s + 1

2.5

3

fig. 5. inverse participation ratio for the reviewer-reviewer matrix. the horizontal axis is rescaled
by the factor s explained in the text. we show the data for the matrix with n = 10000 ( +, s = 1),

and for the random subset with nsub = 5000 of the same matrix (  , s = 3   2). each point denotes

the ipr for the eigenvector corresponding to the indicated eigenvalue   .

other words, we have been able to    nd relatively rare cases when fractional segments
of the network display anomalously high density of mutual links. however, we expect
that this fraction would rapidly grow if more reviewers are included from the top
of the amazon list downwards. from this point of view the small percentage of
the reviewers in small communities is partly an artifact due to the choice of the
reviewers starting from the top of the list of the most productive amazon.com
reviewers.

now, let us look at several speci   c examples of the communities found. the    rst
example of such a small grouping is shown in fig. 6. (in this case we took the 5th
most localized vector, q   1 = 0.095675, corresponding eigenvalue    = 0.359, and the
threshold was taken as t = 0.2.) the items reviewed by the reviewers within the
community found in this way are of two types. first, there are those reviewed by at
least two reviewers from the community. these items keep the community together
and we call them    connectors   . we show them in fig. 6 linked to their corresponding
reviewers. however, one should note that the reviewers themselves play the role of
   connectors    for the items, to the same extent as the items are    connectors    for the
reviewers. second, there are items reviewed by only one reviewer of the community.
these items form a kind of    cloud    around the core of the network segments. we
do not show the    cloud    in our    gures, but we shall discuss its meaning later.

what are the product-connectors in the given community (fig. 6)? we can see
that the maximum number of reviewers for one item is 4 and it holds for two audio
recordings:    the beatles (the white album)    and    abbey road    also by beatles.
thus, the core of the community is kept together by one of the most popular music
bands ever. the remaining items are thematically close. they refer to other records

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

gdb "gman"

cristian domarchi

robmra

john_999

scot p. livingston

stephanie sane

16 localization in social networks

 led zeppelin iii

 houses of the holy
 led zeppelin iv

led zeppelin 1st
 sticky fingers

 love and theft

 blood on the tracks

 planet waves

blonde on blonde

bob dylan
the freewheelin    bob dylan

 another side of bob dylan
john wesley harding

 nashville skyline
self portrait
 new morning
 blood on the tracks
 desire
  street legal
  slow train coming
  planet waves
 knocked out loaded
 under the red sky 
 time out of mind

the times they are a   changin   
bringing it all back home
 highway 61 revisited
pat garrett & billy the kid
the basement tapes
shot of love
infidels
oh mercy
world gone wrong
 empire burlesque
good as i been to you
down in the groove

bob dylan real live [in europe, 1984]
bob dylan: mtv unplugged [live, 1994]
the bootleg series, vol. 4: bob dylan live, 1966

imagine
venus and mars

 past masters, vol. 1

 ram
mccartney

 abbey road
the beatles (the white album)

  revolver

plastic ono band
 milk and honey

tug of war

 beatles for sale

a hard day   s night (1964 film)

with the beatles
  past masters, vol. 2

  magical mystery tour
  let it be

 double fantasy

  the beatles 1

  all things must pass
 yellow submarine (songtrack)

  sgt. pepper   s lonely hearts club band

help!
  run devil run
 yellow submarine 

  please please me

 rubber soul

fig. 6. the    pop-music    community in the network producing a very localized eigenvector of the
matrix a. in the middle, code-names of the reviewers, on the right, recordings by the beatles
(mostly as a band, some other by individual members), on the left, recordings by bob dylan, with
exception of the shaded box which contains four times music by led zeppelin and once rolling
stones.

by beatles and also by beatles ex-members, or to the music of bob dylan. (ex-
)beatles and dylan cover about a half of the items each. the only exception is
a small set of    ve recordings of other pop-classics, namely four of led zeppelin
and one of rolling stones. in short, all items fall into the range of notoriously
known pop-music stars. it is interesting that this characteristic does not concern

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

buffy the vampire slayer     the complete first season
 buffy the vampire slayer     the complete sixth season

 gladiator
 the last samurai

c. meja

 the adventures of indiana jones
 terminator 3     rise of the machines
 pirates of the caribbean     the curse of the black pearl

 kill bill, volume 1
the lord of the rings     the two towers

 the lord of the rings     the return of the king
  star wars     episode ii, attack of the clones
 the matrix reloaded
 the matrix revolutions

denny vu quach

 j. a l "jose_8111"

 daniel geer

slanina and konop  asek

17

the x   files     first season
 the x   files     second season
 the x   files     third season
  the x   files     fourth season
  the x   files     fifth season
  the x   files     ninth season

 the x   files     seventh season
  the x   files     eighth season

 the x   files     sixth season

fig. 7. the    pop-movie    community in the network producing a very localized eigenvector of the
matrix a. in the middle, code-names of the reviewers, on the right, the x-files series, on the left,
other popular movies.

 shut up and sing
 liberalism is a mental disorder

 the price of loyalty
 rome wasn   t burnt in a day
plan of attack
all the president   s spin
 reason

 donnie brasco

 where the right went wrong

 m. mitchell 

 david s. rhodes

unfit for command

 a national party no more

 slander. by: ann coulter

 the republican noise machine
 what   s the matter with kansas?

john

 lies and the lying liars who tell them

treason. by: ann coulter

how to talk to a liberal (if you must). by: ann coulter

deliver us from evil

 steven e rustad

 david fults

the truth about hillary

fig. 8. the    pop-politics    community in the network producing a very localized eigenvector of the
matrix a. in the middle, code-names of the reviewers, on the left and right, books treating mainly
the clash of (neo-) conservatives versus liberals in the usa. note that ann coulter is the most
prominent book author in this community.

the connecting items only, but majority of all other reviews by the members of the
community (not included in the graph). thus, not only the connectors, but also the
   cloud    bears the same characteristics.

therefore, the interest of these reviewers lies, in general, within a rather narrow
scope determined by the pair dylan-beatles, with some small excursions farther
into mainstream pop-music, similar to the small    led zeppelin    set in fig. 6. for
example, the reviewer gdb has also written on cd   s by u2 and david bovie, while
the    cloud    reviews by cristian domarchi (not listed in fig. 6) pertain only to other

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

18 localization in social networks

recordings by ex-beatles plus one book; among all the 6 reviewers, only stephanie
sane shows interests which go clearly beyond the dylan-beatles repertoire, review-
ing a good deal of books, mostly mystery and detective    ction.

a similar picture is provided by the analysis of other communities. let us very

brie   y describe two more of them.

the    rst one (fig. 7) belongs to another pop-cultural domain, this time con-
centrating on dvd movies with a sci-    and fantasy    avor. again, we found that
the reviewers are active within rather narrow bounds. they focus on widely popular
titles, overlapping very little with any other possible themes or genres. only a small
part of the reviews by the members of the community are related to something else,
e.g., to books by m. proust and t. mann.

the third and last example we want to mention is shown in fig. 8. in analogy
with the former examples, the    pop-music    and    pop-movie    communities, we may
call this one a    pop-politics    community. the reviewers here concentrate on books
discussing the presidency of g. bush, the evils of liberal ideology, as compared with
neo-conservatism, and so on. the core of the community is kept together by the
books of ann coulter, who is known as a militant anti-liberal writer. majority of the
books in this group is targeted at the widest public, as is the music by the beatles
and movies of the    x-files    type. their themes are not esoteric, these products are
not aiming at specialized audiences; yet, the zeal of the reviewers makes a    cult    of
them. again, this community is narrowly de   ned by the interest in these popular
issues and not much else. in the    cloud    of other items reviewed by the members
of this community we    nd some other books by ann coulter, accompanied by
books such as (the titles are self-explaining, we believe) worse than watergate:
the secret presidency of george w. bush; blinded by the right: the conscience
of an ex-conservative; a matter of character : inside the white house of george
w. bush; the family : the real story of the bush dynasty; chain of command
: the road from 9/11 to abu ghraib, and similar. out of the six reviewers, only
donnie brasco shows some additional    eld of interest, having written about various
pop-music cd   s as well.

let us sum up these observations (supported also by analyses of other small
communities we were able to    nd in the sample). our expectations that strongly
localized eigenvectors would reveal some speci   c small communities was ful   lled in
the sense that we have indeed found groups of zealots, concentrated on a relatively
narrow segment of commodities sold on amazon.com. individual interests of these
reviewers only scarcely reach beyond the theme common to the community.

on the other hand, however, it would be misleading to imagine these people
as eccentrics focused on highly specialized, marginal or even extreme cultural arti-
facts. the subjects of their reviews are quite ordinary, clearly part of the cultural
mainstream. and, by their tastes, the reviewers themselves seem belonging to wide
audiences, often focused on classics or well-established pop-cultural products. in
other words, anomalous tiny fragments of this huge network, characteristic by var-
ious authors repeatedly writing reviews on the same items, refer typically not to

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

19

some marginal cultural forms with specialized contents, but rather to widely shared
cultural tastes and mainstream enthusiasts.

a more detailed analysis of these    ndings is beyond the scope of this method-
ological paper and its analytical illustration. very probably, several possible ex-
planations could turn valid in parallel, including the nature of the amazon.com
portal (primarily designed for general audiences and as wide consumer population
as possible), possibly higher id203 that reviews on widely favored artifacts
get    localized    etc. what should perhaps be stressed here, however, is the pecu-
liar character of the communities or network segments under discussion. it is clear
that the tiny network fragments counting 5 or 10 reviewers and dozens of reviews
cannot represent    big    consumer populations and    widespread    artifacts in some
straightforward way. rather, they may provide a rather speci   c (   small-scale   ) way
of looking at a mass-scale phenomenon. let us tell something more about this speci-
   city.

we have already noted that the network and its segments we are studying is
not a    social network    as traditionally envisaged. the interaction constituting the
network is so massively mediated and by-produced (while remaining observable,
   real    enough and grounded in intentional social action) that we leave the territory
of what is usually counted by social scientists as a    group    or    community   . but
even more is at stake in this direction. a closer view of our    ndings reveals that
one cannot unambiguously say whether the    connecting    reviewed products pro-
vide interpretive framework for statements about the reviewers, or whether     on
the contrary     it is reviewers and their actions that provide clues for interpreting
communities of products. in other words, we are unable to determine whether we
study groupings of people (connected by products) or of commodities (connected
by people). in fact, we should better try to understand both within a single hybrid
network, meaningfully connected. while studying phenomena of product reviewing,
products and reviewers cannot be separated. the sets of products represented in
our    gures (fig. 6 7 8) do not simply make sense (and do not hold together) without
the reviews written about them by the represented reviewers. indeed, the products
grouped by, e.g., purchases carried out by amazon.com users would look di   erently.
on the other hand, the groups of reviewers would not make sense without the par-
ticular reviewed products (their amount and nature). thus, we believe the segments
identi   ed in our example can directly represent neither populations of consumers
nor entire sections in the amazon.com commodities catalog. rather, they repre-
sent, in a complex way and as if under a speci   c lens, a phenomenon of on-line
user reviewing, better understanding of which may contribute to our knowledge of
contemporary popular culture and technologically mediated economic processes.

6. conclusions

thanks to numerous sociological e   orts in the    eld of social network analysis as
well as the work on networks done in other scienti   c disciplines such as theoretical

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

20 localization in social networks

physics, various mathematical tools have been developed. they aim either at de-
termining large-scale structures in complex networks or at identi   cation of smaller
network segments such as cliques or acquaintances. in this work, we introduced a
new mathematical procedure relatively close to the latter type of task. we believe
the method is well suitable for    nding the most relevant small segments of complex
networks, when    relevance    cannot or need not be equaled to some absolute level
of mutual connectivity between the nodes. we argue that this is often the case,
because important social forces or processes are often related to highly mediated
and heterogeneous groupings, typically constituted as by-products of various, dif-
ferently oriented actions, and where people characteristically and usually do not
intentionally address each other and even do not know each other (here, we could
speak of    ultra-weak    ties). the proposed method based on well-localized eigenvec-
tors is well capable to    nd these small communities with anomalously high density
of mutual links and therefore reveal a kind of semantic information hidden in the
network, otherwise often neglected. as such, our method may be a good starting
point for more    ne-grained further analysis of given phenomena.

as an empirical example, we have chosen the data available from the ama-
zon.com on-line shopping portal. we studied the network constituted by users writ-
ing reviews of the same products o   ered for purchase on the website during the
summer 2005, when the data were gathered. reviewers become connected if they
have written a review on an identical item. when such connections locally prolifer-
ate we get a grouping of relevance.

these groupings are not directly related to the top-lists of popularity, but reveal
the most focused points in the network. they are constituted by socially rather
distant ties, i.e., by a kind of ultra-weak ties, namely highly mediated links by-
produced during processes primarily aimed at something else than addressing each
other to establish acquaintance or become closer.

the    rst important result of our analysis is the power-law tail in the density of
eigenvalues. this feature is partially, but not entirely, due to the power-law degree
distribution. comparing the spectrum arising from the network with the spectrum
of a random network with the same degree sequence, we    nd a power-law tail in both
cases, but the exponent is signi   cantly smaller in the original network. generally,
such a tail implies that the density of cycles beyond certain length diverges when
the size of the network tends to in   nity. the di   erence in the exponent means that
some shorter cycles keep    nite density in the randomized network, while in the
original one they are much more abundant. this means that the amazon network
contains much more compact groupings than what would be expected knowing only
its degree sequence.

to see at least some of these small groupings, we looked at well-localized eigen-
vectors. these localized states represent small communities or network segments
and bear semantic information hidden in the network. we call them    hot spots   ,
as they represent local structures which di   er from the surrounding background.
we were able to explicitly    nd some of these communities and attribute meaning to

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

21

them. the three of them brie   y discussed in this paper can be labeled as pop-music,
pop-movie, and pop-politics communities. the reviewers of these communities are
very strongly focused on one narrow segment. this segment itself belongs usually
to mass or popular culture, so it cannot be considered as marginal or esoteric. it is
the enthusiasm of the reviewers which singles the segment out of the sea of millions
products traded on amazon.com.

our analysis shows that only about half per cent of the reviewers belong to these
network segments in the small sample of 104 reviewers. however, we expect that
this fraction would rapidly grow if more reviewers are included from the top of the
amazon list downwards. if carefully treated and interpreted the identi   ed network
segments may be useful for enhancing our knowledge of mass or popular culture
and complex economic processes related to e-consumerism. especially, it would be
interesting to make systematic classi   cation of the small communities.

besides these speci   c    ndings we would like to highlight another, more general
feature. when analyzing the chosen example, it turned out that conventional talking
about    networks of reviewers    might be sociologically misleading. our groupings, in
fact, were constituted not only by people writing reviews on the same products, but
also (simultaneously) by products reviewed by the same reviewers. that is why we
decided to switch to a more appropriate term    networks of reviewing   . this term
indicates the hybrid nature of networks we have been dealing with and it allows
better talking about processes of online economy rather than on bare structures
composed of its human agents. in this respect, our approach is well compatible
with the currently increasing emphasis on heterogeneity as an essential quality of
collectivities studied by social scientists [60].

the method can be applied in a straightforward way to any kind of network,
whereever the data can be collected easily. however, technical limitations of the
method may arise in networks larger that several tens of thousands of vertices, due
to computer memory limitations. as shown also by the example of amazon.com,
on-line networks are often larger than that. then, we must decide which subset of
the whole network can be considered representative. in our case we chose the subset
of the most productive reviewers, but other networks might require other criteria.

acknowledgments

fs wishes to thank y.-c. zhang for encouragement and inspiring comments and
to fribourg university for support and hospitality during the stay when this study
was started. this work was carried our within the project av0z10100520 of the
academy of sciences of the czech republic and was supported by the m  smt of
the czech republic, grant no. oc09078 and by the research program cts msm
0021620845.

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

22 localization in social networks

references

[1] albert, r. and barab  asi, a.-l., statistical mechanics of complex networks, rev. mod.

phys., 74 (2002) 47-97.

[2] allen, j., symbolic economies: the    culturalization    of economic knowledge, in: cul-
tural economy: cultural analysis and commercial life, eds. p. d. gay and m. pryke
(sage, london, thousand oaks and new delhi, 2002) pp. 39-58.

[3] ausloos, m. and lambiotte, r., clusters or networks of economies? a macroeconomy

study through gross domestic product, physica a, 382 (2007) 16-21.

[4] barab  asi, a.-l. and albert, r., emergence of scaling in random networks, science,

286 (1999) 509-512.

[5] barber, m. j., modularity and community detection in bipartite networks, phys. rev.

e, 76 (2007) 066102.

[6] barry, a. and slater, d., eds., the technological economy (routledge, london and

new york 2005).

[7] beer, d., making friends with jarvis cocker: music culture in the context of web

2.0, cultural sociology, 2 (2008) 222-241.

[8] benkler, y., the wealth of networks: how social production transforms markets and

freedom (yale university press, new haven and london, 2006).

[9] berger, p. l. and luckmann, t., the social construction of reality: a treatise in the

sociology of knowledge (penguine books, harmondsworth, 1967).

[10] bianconi, g., spectral properties of complex networks, arxiv:0804.1744 (2008).
[11] bollob  as, b., random graphs (academic press, london, 1985).
[12] bornholdt, s. and schuster , h. g., handbook of graphs and networks (wiley-vch,

weinheim, 2003).

[13] bouchaud, j.-p. and potters, m., financial applications of random matrix theory:
a short review, arxiv:0910.1205, to appear in: handbook of random matrix theory.
[14] burioni, r. and cassi, d., id93 on graphs: ideas, techniques and results,

j. phys. a., 38 (2005) r45.

[15] callon, m., m  eadel, c., and rabeharisoa, v., the economy of qualities, in: the
technological economy, eds. a. barry and d. slater (routledge, london and new
york, 2005) pp. 28-50.

[16] capocci, a., servedio, v. d. p., caldarelli, g. and colaiori, f., detecting communities

in large networks, physica a, 352 (2005) 669-676.

[17] castells, m., toward a sociology of the network society, contemporary sociology 29

(2000) 693-699.

[18] cattuto, c., schmitz, c., baldassarri, a., servedio, v. d. p., loreto, v., hotho, a.,
grahl, m. and stumme, g., network properties of folksonomies, ai communications,
20 (2007) 245-262.

[19] christakis, n. a. and fowler, j. h., connected: the surprising power of our social

networks and how they shape our lives (hachette book group, new york, 2009).
[20] chung, f. r. k., spectral id207 (american mathematical society, 1997).
[21] danon, l., duch, j., arenas, a. and diaz-guilera, a., comparing community struc-

ture identi   cation, j. stat. mech, (2005) p09008.

[22] david, s. and pinch, t., six degrees of reputation: the use and abuse of online review
and id126s, in: living in a material world: economic sociology
meets science and technology studies eds. t. pinch and r. swedberg (the mit press,
cambridge, ma and london, 2008) pp. 341-374.

[23] degenne, a. and forse, m., introducing social networks (sage, london, thousand

oaks and new delhi, 1994).

[24] diestel, r., id207. (springer, new york, 2000).

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

23

[25] donetti, l. and mu  noz, m. a., detecting network communities: a new systematic

and e   cient algorithm, j. stat. mech., (2004) p10012.

[26] donetti, l. and mu  noz, m. a., improved spectral algorithm for the detection of

network communities, physics/0504059, (2005).

[27] dorogovtsev, s. n. and mendes, j. f. f., evolution of random networks, adv. phys.,

51 (2002) 1079-1187.

[28] dorogovtsev, s. n. and mendes, j. f. f., evolution of networks. (oxford university

press, oxford, 2003).

[29] dorogovtsev, s. n., goltsev, a. v. and mendes, j. f. f., pseudofractal scale-free

web, phys. rev. e, 65 (2002) 066122.

[30] dorogovtsev, s. n., goltsev, a. v., mendes, j. f. f. and samukhin, a. n., spectra

of complex networks, phys. rev. e, 68 (2003) 046109.

[31] emirbayer, m. and goodwin, j., network analysis, culture, and the problem of

agency, american journal of sociology 99 (1994) 1411-1453.

[32] erd  os, p. and r  enyi, a., on random graphs i, pub. math. debrecen, 5 (1959) 290-297.
[33] eriksen, k. a., simonsen, i., maslov, s. and sneppen, k., modularity and extreme

edges of the internet, phys. rev. lett., 90 (2003) 148701.

[34] farkas, i. j., der  enyi, i., barab  asi, a.-l., vicsek, t., spectra of    real-world    graphs:

beyond the semi-circle law, phys. rev. e, 64 (2001) 026704.

[35] farkas, i., der  enyi, i., jeong, h., n  eda, z., oltvai, z. n., ravasz, e., schubert, a.,
barab  asi, a.-l. and vicsek, t., networks in life: scaling properties and eigenvalue
spectra, physica a, 314 (2002) 25-34.

[36] ferrer i cancho, r., capocci, a. and caldarelli, g., id106 cluster words

of the same class in a syntactic dependency network, cond-mat/0504165, (2005).

[37] foot, k., internet use and meaning, materiality, and sociality through activity theory.
presentation at the 4s annual conference, washington d.c., oct. 31, 2009 (2009).

[38] fortunato, s., community detection in graphs, phys. rep., 486 (2010) 75-174.
[39] fortunato, s. and castellano, c., community structure in graphs, in: encyclopedia

of complexity and system science, (springer, new york, 2009).

[40] fortunato, s., latora, v. and marchiori, m., method to    nd community structures

based on information centrality, phys. rev. e, 70 (2004) 056104.

[41] galluccio, s., bouchaud, j.-p. and potters, m., rational decisions, random matrices

and spin glasses, physica a, 259 (1998) 449-456.

[42] goh, k.-i., kahng, b. and kim, d., spectra and eigenvectors of scale-free networks,

phys. rev. e, 64 (2001) 051903.

[43] gopikrishnan, p., rosenow, b., plerou, v. and stanley, h. e., quantifying and in-
terpreting collective behavior in    nancial markets, phys. rev. e, 64 (2001) 035106.
[44] granovetter, m., the strength of weak ties: a id177 revisited sociological

theory 1 (1983) 201-233.

[45] granovetter, m., the strength of weak ties, american journal of sociology, 78

(1973) 1360-1380.

[46] guimer`a r. and amaral, l. a. n., functional cartography of complex metabolic

networks, nature, 433 (2005) 895-900.

[47] hacking, i., the social construction of what? (harvard university press, cambridge,

1999).

[48] heimo, t., tib  ely, g., saram  aki, j., kaski, k. and kert  esz, j., id106 and

cluster structure in correlation-based networks, physica a, 387 (2008) 5930-5945.

[49] jalan, s., solymosi, n., vattay, g. and li, b., random matrix analysis of localization

properties of gene coexpression network, phys. rev. e, 81 (2010) 046118.

[50] k  uhn, r., spectra of sparse random matrices, j. phys. a: math. theor., 41 (2008)

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

24 localization in social networks

295002.

[51] kamp, c. and christensen, k., spectral analysis of protein-protein interactions in

drosophila melanogaster, phys. rev. e, 71 (2005) 041911.

[52] kim, d.-h. and jeong, h., systematic analysis of group identi   cation in stock mar-

kets, phys. rev e, 72 (2005) 046133.

[53] kim, b. j., hong, h. and choi, m. y., netons: vibrations of complex networks, j.

phys. a: math. gen., 36 (2003) 6329.

[54] kullmann, l., kert  esz, j. and mantegna, r. n., identi   cation of clusters of companies
in stock indices via potts super-paramagnetic transitions, physica a, 287 (2000) 412-
419.

[55] laloux, l., cizeau, p., bouchaud, j.-p. and potters, m., noise dressing of financial

correlation matrices, phys. rev. lett., 83 (1999) 1467-1470.

[56] lambiotte, r. and ausloos, m., uncovering collective listening habits and music

genres in bipartite networks, phys. rev. e, 72 (2005) 066107.

[57] lancichinetti, a., fortunato, s. and kert  esz, j., detecting the overlapping and hier-
archical community structure of complex networks, new j. phys., 11 (2009) 033015.
[58] lancichinetti, a., kivel  a, m., saram  aki, j. and fortunato, s., characterizing the

community structure of complex networks, plos one, 5 (2010) e11976.
[59] lash, s. and urry, j., economies of signs and space (sage, london, 1994).
[60] latour, b., reassembling the social: an introduction to actor   id177 (oxford

university press, oxford, 2005).

[61] leskovec, j., lang, k. j. and mahoney, m. w., empirical comparison of algorithms
for network community detection, in: www    10: proceedings of the 19th interna-
tional conference on world wide web, (2010) pp. 631-640.

[62] licoppe, c., understanding and reframing the electronic consumption experience:
the interactional ambiguities of mediated coordination, in: living in a material
world: economic sociology meets science and technology studies eds. t. pinch and
r. swedberg (the mit press cambridge, ma and london, 2008) pp. 317-340.

[63] mar  cenko, v. a. and pastur, l. a., distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of random

matrices, math. ussr   sbornik, 1 (1967) 457-483.

[64] mehta, m. l., random matrices. (academic press, san diego, 1991).
[65] nagao, t. and rodgers, g. j., spectral density of complex networks with a    nite

mean degree, j. phys. a: math. theor., 41 (2008) 265002.

[66] nagao, t. and tanaka, t., spectral density of sparse sample covariance matrices, j.

phys. a: math. theor., 40 (2007) 4973-4987.

[67] newman, m. e. j., finding community structure in networks using the eigenvectors

of matrices, phys. rev. e, 74 (2006) 036104.

[68] newman, m. e. j. and girvan, m., mixing patterns and community structure in
in: statistical mechanics of complex networks, eds. r. pastor-satorras, j.

networks,
rub     and a. diaz-guilera, (springer, berlin, 2003) pp. 66-87.

[69] newman, m. e. j. and girvan, m., finding and evaluating community structure in

networks, phys. rev. e, 69 (2004) 026113.

[70] newman, m., barab  asi, a.-l., watts , d. j., the structure and dynamics of networks

(princeton university press, princeton, 2006).

[71] noh, j. c. and rieger, h., id93 on complex networks, phys. rev. lett., 92

(2004) 118701.

[72] palla, g., der  enyi, i., farkas, i. and vicsek, t., uncovering the overlapping commu-
nity structure of complex networks in nature and society, nature, 435 (2005) 814-818.
[73] plerou, v., gopikrishnan, p., rosenow, b., amaral, l. a. n. and stanley, h. e.,
universal and nomuniversal properties of cross correlations in    nancial time series,

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

slanina and konop  asek

25

phys. rev. lett., 83 (1999) 1471-1474.

[74] plerou, v., gopikrishnan, p., rosenow, b., amaral, l. a. n. and stanley, h. e.,
random matrix approach to cross correlations in    nancial data, physica a, 287
(2000) 374-382.

[75] plerou, v., gopikrishnan, p., rosenow, b., amaral, l. a. n., guhr, t. and stanley,
h. e., random matrix approach to cross correlations in    nancial data, phys. rev. e,
65 (2002) 066126.

[76] radicchi, f., castellano, c., cecconi, f., loreto, v. and parisi, d., de   ning and
identifying communities in networks, proc. natl. acad. sci. usa, 101 (2004) 2658-
2663.

[77] reichardt, j. and bornholdt, s., detecting fuzzy community structures in complex

networks with a potts model, phys. rev. lett., 93 (2004) 218701.

[78] rheingold, h., the virtual community: homesteading on the electronic frontier

(addison-wesley, reading, ma, 1993).

[79] rodgers, g. j. and bray, a. j., density of states of a sparse random matrix, phys.

rev. b, 37 (1988) 3557-3562.

[80] rodgers, g. j., austin, k., kahng, b. and kim, d., eigenvalue spectra of complex

networks, j. phys. a: math. gen., 38 (2005) 9431-9437.

[81] rogers, t., castillo, i. p., k  uhn, r. and takeda, k., cavity approach to the spectral

density of sparse symmetric random matrices, phys. rev. e, 78 (2008) 031116.

[82] sawardecker, e. n., amundsen, c. a., sales-pardo, m. and amaral, l. a. n., com-
parison of methods for the detection of node group membership in bipartite networks,
eur. phys. j., 72 (2009) 671-677.

[83] scott, j., social network analysis: a handbook (sage, london, thousand oaks and

new delhi, 2000).

[84] semerjian, g. and cugliandolo, l. f., sparse random matrices: the eigenvalue spec-

trum revisited, j. phys. a: math. gen., 35 (2002) 4837-4851.

[85] simonsen , i., eriksen , k. a., maslov, s. and sneppen, k., di   usion on complex
networks: a way to probe their large-scale topological structures, physica a, 336
(2004) 163-173.

[86] slanina, f. and zhang, y.-c., referee networks and their spectral properties, acta

phys. pol. b, 36 (2005) 2797-2804.

[87] star, s. l. and griesemer, j. r., institutional ecology,    translations    and bound-
ary objects: amateurs and professionals in berkeley   s museum of vertebrate zoology,
1907-39, social studies of science 19 (1989) 387-420.

[88] strogatz, s. h., exploring complex networks, nature, 410 (2001) 268-276.
[89] tib  ely, g., onnela, j.-p., saram  aki, j., kaski, k. and kert  esz, j., spectrum, intensity
and coherence in weighted networks of a    nancial market, physica a, 370 (2006) 145-
150.

[90] wasserman, s. and faust, k., social network analysis: methods and application (cam-

bridge university press cambridge, 1994).

[91] wellman, b., sala   , j., dimitrova, d., garton, l., and al., e., computer networks as
social networks: collaborative work, telework, and virtual community, annual review
of sociology 22 (1996) 213-238.

[92] wittel, a., toward a network sociality, theory, culture and society 18 (2001) 51-76.
[93] woolgar, s., re   exive internet? the british experience of new electronic technologies,
in: the network society: a cross-cultural perspective, ed. m. castells (edward elgar,
cheltenham and northampton, ma, 2004) pp. 125-143.

[94] zhao, f., yang, h. and wang, b., scaling invariance in spectra of complex networks:

a di   usion factorial moment approach, phys. rev. e, 72 (2005) 046119.

june

2,

2018 20:15 wspc/instruction

file

slaninakonopasek100920

26 localization in social networks

[95] zhou, t., ren, j., medo, m. and zhang, y.-c., bipartite network projection and

personal recommendation, phys. rev. e, 76 (2007) 046115.

