1
1
0
2

 

v
o
n
4

 

 
 
]

c
h
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
0
0
2
6

.

0
1
1
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

topicviz: semantic navigation of document

collections

jacob eisenstein, duen horng    polo    chau, aniket kittur and eric xing

school of computer science
carnegie mellon university
pittsburgh, pa 15215 usa

august 27, 2018

abstract

when people explore and manage information, they think in terms of topics and themes.
however, the software that supports information exploration sees text at only the surface level.
in this paper we show how id96     a technique for identifying latent themes across
large collections of documents     can support semantic exploration. we present topicviz, an
interactive environment for information exploration. topicviz combines traditional search and
citation-graph functionality with a range of novel interactive visualizations, centered around a
force-directed layout that links documents to the latent themes discovered by the topic model.
we describe several use scenarios in which topicviz supports rapid sensemaking on large doc-
ument collections.

introduction

1
as information repositories continue to expand and diversify, there is an urgent need for sys-
tems that help people explore and make sense of large document collections. while researchers
in information-seeking and related areas have developed increasingly effective interaction tech-
niques for navigating document collections [1, 16], these methods are hampered by a view of
language that is generally restricted to the surface level; such techniques are oblivious to the
semantic meaning behind the text. meanwhile, researchers in machine learning and natural
language processing have developed powerful statistical methods for recovering latent seman-
tics [2], but the output of these methods is dif   cult to present to both domain expert and novice
users alike.

in this paper, we introduce topicviz, a new tool for searching and navigating large docu-
ment collections (figure 1). topicviz infers a set of topics that summarize the latent high-level
semantic organization of a collection, and provides a novel interactive view that exposes this
semantic organization using a force-directed layout. this layout permits a range of interactive

1

affordances, allowing users to gradually re   ne their understanding of the search results and
citations links, while focusing in on key semantic distinctions of interest.

the analytic engine of our approach is the topic model     a powerful statistical technique
for identifying latent themes in a document collection [2]. without any annotation, topic mod-
els can extract topics     sets of semantically-related words     and describe each document as a
mixture of these topics. for example, a given research paper might be characterized as 70%
human-computer interaction, and 30% machine learning.1 topic models have been success-
fully applied to a broad range of text, and the extracted topics have been shown to cohere with
readers    semantic judgments [4]. but while topic models are often motivated as a technique
to support information seeking, there has been little investigation of how users can understand
and exploit them.

one of the principle strengths of topic models is their    exibility: topics need not correspond
to any prede   ned taxonomy, but rather represent the latent structure inherent to the document
collection. however, this means that the content of each topic must somehow be conveyed
to the user. in id96 research, this issue is almost invariably addressed by showing
ranked lists of words and documents that are closely associated with each topic. but such
lists have undesirable properties:
it is dif   cult to show more than a few entries per topic,
the meaning of individual terms may be unknown to non-experts;2 in addition, the numerical
scores for each word and topic are hard to interpret.

while hundreds of papers address the mathematical methodology of id96, rel-
atively few take up the question of how topic models can support information exploration.
our approach is distinguished from prior work in its emphasis on interaction: the user is em-
powered to manipulate the visualization by adding, rearranging or removing topics, and by
controlling the set of documents to visualize. the motivation for this design stems from our
focus on local information exploration: we aim to provide a deep understanding of a local
area of the information landscape that is relevant to the user   s goals, rather than a surface-level
static view of thousands of documents. we provide affordances for users to quickly focus in
on the topical distinctions that are relate to their goals, allowing them to interactively manip-
ulate topics within this space to better understand document-document, document-topic, and
topic-topic relationships.

2 background
topic models of document collections a topic model is a hierarchical probabilistic
model of document content [2]. each topic is a id203 distribution over words,   ; ev-
ery word in every document is assumed to be randomly generated from one topic. in a given
document the proportion of words generated from each topic is given by a latent vector   d.
thus, the matrix    provides a succinct summary of the semantics of each document.

both the topics    and the document descriptions    can be obtained through of   ine statistical
id136 [2, 10], without any need for manual annotation. thus, topics need not correspond to

1this distinguishes topic models from more coarse-grained techniques that treat each document as a member of a

single cluster [7].

2for example,    muc   ,    muc-6    and    muc-7    are three of the four most relevant terms for one of the topics learned
by our model. these terms are well-known to experts in natural language processing (they are the names of shared
research tasks), but are incomprehensible to an outsider.

2

figure 1: the topicviz environment. the main panel shows the initial presentation for a selected set
of documents, which are arranged in a force-directed layout controlled by the seven best-matching
topics. the upper-left panel shows the search results in list form, and the lower-left panel describes
the selected topic,    multilingual   .

3

   morphology   

   multilingual   

morphemes
morpheme

af   xes
af   x
kanji
endings
in   ections
suf   xes

in   ectional
katakana

bilingual

english-chinese

bitext

english-french
monolingual

melamed
cognates
hansard

japanese-english

systran

   parsing   
nonterminal
nonterminals

adjoining

id18s
id18

subtree

non-terminal

subtrees
adjunction

non-terminals

figure 2: a textual display of the top ten automatically-identi   ed keywords from three topics
obtained from a dataset of research papers on computational linguistics. the topic names were
assigned manually.

any prede   ned categories; indeed, this is why they are useful for exploratory analysis. in the
research literature, topic models are often displayed through textual tables showing the most
relevant words and documents for each topic, as in figure 2.

in typical scenarios, the number of topics ranges from 10-200, and the number of docu-
ments can range from a few hundred to hundreds of thousands. the number of topics can be
determined automatically [20], or set in advance through interactive exploration by a domain
expert. note that topicviz is not currently designed to support the user in training new topic
models or exploring alternative topic model parametrizations. rather, we target the case where
a topic model is trained in advance, to be used by many novices who are interested in a given
domain, such as legal documents or research literature. we consider the problem of supporting
end users to train new topic models to be an important area of future work.

visualizing large document collections most prior work on visualizing large document
collections can be divided into two high-level streams: citation graphs and static projection. in
citation graph approaches, each document is a node, and edges are used to represent citation
links; id91 is then performed over the resulting graph [19, 3]. the clusters are displayed
using techniques such as triangulation [19] or force-directed layout [3]. such approaches are
well-suited to discover connected disciplines in science at a high-level, but do not consider the
textual content of individual documents.

projection-based methods apply topic models [12, 9, 21] or related techniques like latent
semantic analysis [14]. the high-dimensional document descriptions (  d in our notation from
earlier in this section) are then projected into two-dimensional coordinates for visualization
(landauer et al. user color as an additional dimension [14]). a related, recent approach to use
visualize topic models is the work of liu et al., who emphasize the temporal dimension by
placing it on the the x-axis of a graph that shows the evolution of topic strength and content
over time [15].

we differ from this prior work in our emphasis on document search and interactive sense-

4

making [8, 13]. rather than viewing the entire collection and topic model in a single static
view, the user manipulates an ever-shifting subset of documents and topics. this approach is
driven by the intuition     dating back to early work on scatter/gather [7]     that only a small
corner of the topic space will be relevant for any given information search. we allow docu-
ments to be easily added and removed from the view, either through additional search queries
or by exploring citation links; similarly, topics can be moved and manipulated to reveal subtle
semantic distinctions. the remainder of the paper describes these affordances in greater detail.

3 scenarios
the key idea behind topicviz is to integrate a force-directed layout for topic models with an
integrated environment for expanding and re   ning a document list. as in conventional doc-
ument search, the entrance point is the search query; however, rather than simply listing the
search results, they are visualized in an interactive force-directed layout with a range of affor-
dances. as these capabilities are best described by example, this section is centered around a
detailed novice user scenario and two briefer expert scenarios.3 the mechanisms underlying
topicviz are described in detail in the following section.

3.1 novice scenario
consider an individual given the task of searching an unfamiliar research literature, with the
goal of identifying whether a particular technology can be applied to a commercial problem. in
our scenario, the individual is tasked with determining whether it is possible to automatically
identify names on foreign language websites, using a collection of 15,032 research papers on
computational linguistics [18].

the user begins by devising a query; with current tools like google scholar and lexis
nexis, the response to the query would be an ordered list of results. only some of the resulting
documents will be relevant, and almost surely there will be relevant documents that do not
match the query. the user may then vary the search terms or navigate the citation links to try
to get a complete sense of the research literature in this unfamiliar area.

now consider the same task, performed with topicviz. the    rst step is the same: the user
supplies a search query. the results are shown in a list (the top-left part of figure 1). the
user then drags as many documents as desired into the main area, which is called the topic
field: each document is displayed as a node, and these nodes are surrounded by a ring of
topic centers. the topic centers are    pinned,    while the position of each document is set by
a force-directed layout in which the topics each exert an attractive force proportional to the
document   s topical relevance. thus, documents with similar content will be located near each
other.

the size of each topic center is determined by its relevance to the documents in the    eld,
and only the most relevant topics are shown. the panel on the lower-left shows the most
relevant words for each topic (selected by mouseover). the user can also see the relevance
of each topic to the documents in the    eld both statically (by the document   s position) and

3video of many of these affordances can be found at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/  dchau/topicviz/

topicviz.mp4.

5

figure 3: rearranging the topic centers to view topic-topic relationships

6

figure 4: by arranging the topic centers into two points, the documents are shown linearly by
relevance.

dynamically (by dragging the topic center around to see how the document nodes are affected).
the topic names are speci   ed in advance, either manually by a domain expert, or through
automatic methods [17]; the user is free to rename topics with more familiar terms.

in our scenario, the user recognizes the topic multilingual as especially relevant to the
search     but other topics like morphology and bayesian are not familiar. to better understand
if these topics are relevant, the user rearranges the topics, with multilingual in the upper-left
corner and the unfamiliar topics in an arc across the screen (figure 3). from this view, the user
sees that morphology is related to multilingual, as several documents have strong connections
with both topics.

the user inspects the set of terms associated with the topic morphology (figure 2). while
terms like    morpheme    and    in   ection    are confusing, the user recognizes the terms    af   x   
and    suf   x    as referring to parts of individual words. based on this insight, the user renames
the topic from morphology to subwords. while this name is not typically used in the research
literature, it helps the user relate the topic model to her pre-existing ontology.

having identi   ed morphology and multilingual as key topics of interest, the user again
rearranges the topics, placing the relevant topics in one corner of the screen and the others
in another corner. this causes the document nodes to form a line, with location governed by
relevance to the topics of the interest (figure 4). the user now removes documents that are not
close to the desired topics by selecting and deleting their nodes.

7

the user has now culled the original list of query hits to a set of documents that are closely
related to multiple topics of interest. but the coverage of this document set depends on the
quality of the original query. to make sure that important documents have not been missed, the
user selects a subset of particularly promising documents and adds documents that cite them.
these new documents may not match the search query by name, but may still be relevant. the
user can now investigate the topical characteristics of these new documents and further re   ne
the search.

ultimately, the user arrives at a set of documents that re   ect the underlying semantics of
the information search. by investigating the topic structure, the user has pruned away    false
positives    that match the query but are in fact irrelevant; by walking the citation graph, the
user has identi   ed    false negatives    that are relevant but did not match the original query.
morever, by interatively exploring the documents, topics, and terms that relate to the initial
query, the user acquires a deeper, structured understanding of the relevant area of the document
collection. this elucidates the speci   c role played by each document in the relevant research
literature, and contextualizes previously unknown themes, such as the topic morphology. the
user is now prepared to summarize the desired content, having obtained both a comprehensive,
high-precision list of documents and a clearer understanding of this area of research.

3.2 expert scenarios
determining author expertise we brie   y consider a scenario involving a user who has
more expertise in the domain of the document collection. here, the expert wants to identify
the topical interests of several authors     perhaps to distinguish the speci   c contributions of
multiple authors on a single paper. to do this, the user searches for papers by each author
and drags them into the    eld. however, unlike the previous view, the documents are pinned in
place, and the topics    oat between them (such non-default behavior can be easily set using the
toolbar at the topic of the window). the edges in the force-directed layout are bidirectional, and
work identically in this setting; the user need only pin sets of documents for each author, and
then add relevant topics to the view. figure 5 shows such a view for the relationship between
the three authors of a heavily-cited paper in computational linguistics; this view reveals that
the author to the upper-left has focused more on the speech topic; the author to the upper-right
has focused more on syntax and lexical semantics; and the author on the bottom has focused
more on the bayesian and applications topics.

direct manipulation 2d projections finally, we consider a scenario in which an expert
user has a detailed understanding of the topic model, and wants to select a set of documents
that    t a very speci   c semantic pro   le. the novice scenario explored an affordance in which
documents were arranged on a spectrum between two topics (figure 4). in fact, much more ex-
pressive arrangements are possible, yielding a direct-manipulation inferface for creating two-
dimensional projections.

suppose that the expert user wants documents that describe multilingual analysis and
translation, but avoid syntax and parsing; in fact, let us suppose that parsing is completely
inappropriate due to technical constraints. the user can arrange the topic centers on a line, with
parsing to the far left and syntax slightly left of center, while locating the multilingual and
translation topics to the far right. such a con   guration can be viewed as a one-dimensional

8

figure 5: to compare topical emphasis of different authors, the expert user creates and pins    piles   
of documents for each author; the unpinned topic centers are pulled between them.

9

figure 6: the expert user arranges the topic centers on the x and y-axes to create a custom two-
dimensional projection of the topic space.

projection that assigns a large negative weight to parsing, a smaller negative weight to syn-
tax, and a equal positive weights to multilingual and translation. next, the user wants to
distinguish documents that focus on morphology from those that focus on semantics     this
time using the y-axis. the    nal con   guration is shown in figure 6. the user can now select
the documents in the desired subspace for further viewing and re   nement, as described in the
novice scenario.

overall, we see that in two dimensions, the location of each topic center de   nes a projection
matrix that reduces the high-dimensional topic proportion vector to an easily viewable two
dimensional representation. by dragging topics further from the center, their absolute weight
is increased, causing them to exert a greater in   uence on the position of each document. thus,
topicviz offers an intuitive direct manipulation interface for designing projections that isolate
the desired region of topic space.

4 the topicviz system
we now describe in more detail the mechanisms and affordances underlying the topicviz sys-
tem. the core idea of topicviz is to provide affordances for interactively exploring the topical
af   liations of a set of documents, while facilitating re   nement and expansions of the docu-

10

ment set. thus, the main entry point is the search query, which will be familiar to users from
traditional information search interfaces. however, from this point, we diverge from prior ap-
proaches, emphasizing the direct manipulation design of novel 2d projections and interactive
exploration of document-topic and topic-topic relationships. the previous section described
the envisioned use cases for such interactions; we now describe the underlying mechanisms.

4.1 document positioning
as described in section 2, a topic model is de   ned by the topic-term relations and the topic-
document relations. both objects are high-dimensional: the topic-term matrix contains a row
for each topic, and a column for each word in the vocabulary; the topic-document matrix con-
tains a row for each document and a column for each topic. the number of documents and
vocabulary size are each typically in the thousands;4, and the numerical values are not intu-
itively meaningful on their own; rather, the structure of the topic model is best understood in a
relational setting. thus, we present a document    eld view incorporating topics and documents.
in the document    eld, we see the relationship between documents and topics. inspired by
   dust-and-magnet    approaches to information visualization, (e.g., [22]), we initially arrange
a ring of topic nodes around the outside of the    eld, which act as magnets. documents are
represented as nodes within this    eld; edge weights are based on hooke   s law, with 1       di as
the force of the spring between topic i and document d. a document that is a near 100% match
for a given topic will be placed almost directly on that topic   s magnet; a document that is a
50% match for each of two topics will be positioned halfway between them. thus, documents
that have similar topic proportions are located near each other, re   ecting semantic differences
directly in the spatial layout. visualizing such a high-dimensional model in 2d inevitably
causes information to be lost, but the force-directed layout permits interactive manipulation of
document nodes, allowing users to more closely examine regions of particular interest.

4.2 document set re   nement
as the number of documents in a collection is typically in the thousands, it is not helpful to
view all of the documents at the same time. our interface includes two affordances for selecting
sets of documents to visualize. the    rst affordance     which is the entry point to interaction
with our system     is the search query. just as in traditional search interfaces, the user enters
a query and receives a list of results (in a separate panel). these results can be sorted by
traditional metadata: titles, author, year, and venue. the user can then drag documents into the
document    eld, which provides an intuitive graphical visualization of the semantic structure of
the search results. the second affordance permits the user to walk to the citation graph, adding
citing or cited documents for any set of documents already in the view; the citation links are
made visible.

by default, the set of topic magnets is dynamically updated to show the topics that are most
relevant to the documents currently in the    eld. this feature can be turned off, allowing topics
to be added and deleted manually.

4in the scenario, the number of topics is 25; the vocabulary size is 18,743 (after pruning infrequent words) the

number of documents is 15,032.

11

4.3 implementation
topicviz is implemented through shiftr [5], a java platform designed to support interactive ex-
ploration and querying of large graph data with millions of nodes and edges. shiftr builds on
the prefuse library for force-directed layouts [11], providing a collection of fundamental oper-
ations over graph data: querying nodes by arbitrary node attributes; visualizing user-speci   ed
subgraphs; and    exible spatial arrangement for nodes through pinning and unpinning. top-
icviz uses these lower-level operations to provide a force-directed layout interface for exploring
topic models of document content.

5 future work
a key target for future work is empirical validation. indeed, beyond the necessary task of eval-
uating the speci   c design decisions taken in topicviz, we also believe that this tool can serve as
a platform for in situ user studies of whether and how topic models can best support document
set exploration and sensemaking. speci   cally, we plan to develop a battery of information-
exploration tasks (similar to the email exploration tasks of liu et al. [15]) and compare the
ef   cacy of topicviz with traditional search interfaces, as well as textual and table-based repre-
sentations of topic models.

from a visualization standpoint, we see several intriguing directions for future work. while
topicviz offers an innovative take on the document-topic relationship, the connection between
topics and terms is still expressed through traditional term lists. we plan to explore whether
a more spatial visualization for this relationship would be possible, or whether an alternative
approach such as docuburst [6] could be incorporated in the topicviz environment. we also
believe that an integrated presentation of document metadata such as time, authorship, and
venue would substantially improve the practical usability of the system. finally, we are eager
to investigate the use of color as a third dimension, either to visualize such metadata, or to
enable gestalt high-level comparisons between document sets [14].

6 summary
topic models can give powerful insights on document collections     but only if used in combi-
nation with a comprehensible presentation and an interaction design built around the informa-
tion exploration process. topicviz presents an interactive visualization that places topic models
in the context of a search interface,    lling the same role currently played by keyword search.
we see two main advantages of our approach: it accounts for latent document semantics, and
provides an interactive spatial visualization that allows the user to rapidly focus on key areas
of interest.

acknowledgments
this work was supported by the following grants: afosr fa9550010247, onr n0001140910758,
nsf oci-0943148, nsf iis-0968484, nsf iis-0713379, nsf career dbi-0546594, and
an alfred p. sloan fellowship.

12

references
[1] m. baldonado and t. winograd. sensemaker: an information-exploration interface sup-
porting the contextual evolution of a user   s interests. in proceedings of chi, pages 11   18,
1997.

[2] d. m. blei, a. y. ng, and m. i. jordan. id44. journal of machine

learning research, 3:993   1022, 2003.

[3] k. w. boyack, r. klavans, and k. b  orner. mapping the backbone of science. sciento-

metrics, 64(3):351   374, 2005.

[4] j. chang, j. boyd-graber, s. gerrish, c. wang, and d. m. blei. reading tea leaves: how

humans intepret topic models. in nips, 2009.

[5] d. h. chau, a. kittur, c. faloutsos, and j. i. hong. shiftr: a user-directed, link-based
system for ad hoc sensemaking of large heterogeneous data collections. in proceedings
of chi, pages 3535   3536, 2009.

[6] c. collins, s. carpendale, and g. penn. docuburst: visualizing document content using

language structure. computer graphics forum, 28(3):1039   1046, 2009.

[7] d. cutting, d. karger, j. pedersen, and j. tukey. scatter/gather: a cluster-based approach
to browsing large document collections. in proceedings of sigir, pages 318   329, 1992.
[8] b. dervin. an overview of sense-making research: concepts, methods, and results to

date. in annual meeting of the international communication association, 1983.

[9] h. et al. the nih visual browser: an interactive visualization of biomedical research. in

proceedings of ieee conference on information visualisation, 2009.

[10] t. grif   ths and m. steyvers. finding scienti   c topics, 2004.
[11] j. heer, s. k. card, and j. a. landay. prefuse: a toolkit for interactive information

visualization. in proceedings of chi, pages 421   430, 2005.

[12] t. iwata, t. yamada, and n. ueda. probabilistic latent semantic visualization: topic

model for visualizing documents. in proceedings of kdd, 2008.

[13] c. c. kuhlthau. inside the search process: information seeking from the users perspec-

tive. journal of the american society for information science, 42:361   371, 1991.

[14] t. k. landauer, d. laham, and m. derr. from paragraph to graph: latent semantic

analysis for information visualization. pnas, 101:5214   5219, april 2004.

[15] s. liu, m. x. zhou, s. pan, w. qian, w. cai, and x. lian. interactive, topic-based visual

text summarization and analysis. in proceedings of cikm, pages 543   552, 2009.

[16] g. marchionini. exploratory search: from    nding to understanding. communications of

the acm, 49(4):46, 2006.

[17] q. mei, x. shen, and c. zhai. automatic labeling of multinomial topic models.

in

proceedings of kdd, pages 490   499, 2007.

[18] d. r. radev, p. muthukrishnan, and v. qazvinian. the acl anthology network corpus.
in workshop on text and citation analysis for scholarly digital libraries, pages 54   61,
2009.

13

[19] h. small. visualizing science by citation mapping. journal of the american society for

information science, 50(9):799   813, 1999.

[20] y. teh, m. jordan, m. beal, and d. blei. hierarchical dirichlet processes. journal of the

american statistical association, 101(576):1566   1581, 2006.

[21] l. van der maaten and g. hinton. visualizing high-dimensional data using id167. journal

of machine learning research, 9:2579   2605, 2008.

[22] j. s. yi, r. melton, j. stasko, and j. a. jacko. dust & magnet: multivariate information

visualization using a magnet metaphor. information visualization, 4:239   256, 2005.

14

