1
1
0
2

 

v
o
n
 
0
3

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
3
2
7

.

1
1
1
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

universal features of correlated bursty behaviour
m. karsai,1,     k. kaski,1 a.-l. barab  asi,2, 3 and j. kert  esz3, 1

1becs, school of science, aalto university, p.o. box 12200, fi-00076

2center for complex networks research, northeastern university, boston, ma 02115

3institute of physics and bme-has cond. mat. group, bme, budapest, budafoki   ut 8., h-1111

(dated: october 31, 2018)

inhomogeneous temporal processes, like those appearing in human communications, neuron spike
trains, and seismic signals, consist of high-activity bursty intervals alternating with long low-activity
periods. in recent studies such bursty behavior has been characterized by a fat-tailed inter-event time
distribution, while temporal correlations were measured by the autocorrelation function. however,
these characteristic functions are not capable to fully characterize temporally correlated heteroge-
nous behavior. here we show that the distribution of the number of events in a bursty period serves
as a good indicator of the dependencies, leading to the universal observation of power-law distribu-
tion in a broad class of phenomena. we    nd that the correlations in these quite di   erent systems
can be commonly interpreted by memory e   ects and described by a simple phenomenological model,
which displays temporal behavior qualitatively similar to that in real systems.

in nature there are various phenomena, from earth-
quakes [1] to sunspots [2] and neuronal activity, [3] that
show temporally inhomogeneous sequence of events, in
which the overall dynamics is determined by aggregate
e   ects of competing processes. this happens also in hu-
man dynamics as a result of individual decision mak-
ing and of various kinds of correlations with one   s so-
cial environment. these systems can be characterized
by intermittent switching between periods of low ac-
tivity and high activity bursts [4   6], which can appear
as a collective phenomena similar to processes seen in
self-organized criticality [7   16].
in contrast with such
self-organized patterns intermittent switching can be de-
tected at the individual level as well (see fig.1), as seen
for single neuron    rings and for earthquakes at a single
location, both showing inhomogeneous temporal patterns
[9   11, 17, 18, 22].

further examples of bursty behavior at the individual
level have been observed in the digital records of human
communication activities through di   erent channels [4,
23   26]. over the last few years di   erent explanations
have been proposed about the origin of inhomogeneous
human dynamics [4, 22, 27], including the single event
level [28], and about the impact of circadian and weekly
   uctuations [7]. moreover, by using novel technology of
radio frequency id   s, heterogeneous temporal behavior
was observed in the dynamics of face-to-face interactions
[30, 31]. this was explained by a reinforcement dynamics
[32, 33] driving the decision making process at the single
entity level.

for systems with discrete event dynamics it is usual to
characterize the observed temporal inhomogeneities by
the inter-event time distributions, p (tie), where tie =
ti+1     ti denotes the time between consecutive events.
a broad p (tie) [3, 23, 34] re   ects large variability in
the inter-event times and denotes heterogeneous tempo-
ral behavior. note that p (tie) alone tells nothing about

    marton.karsai@aalto.   

the presence of correlations, usually characterized by the
autocorrelation function, a(   ), or by the power spectrum
density. however, for temporally heterogeneous signals
of independent events with fat-tailed p (tie) the hurst ex-
ponent can assign false positive correlations [1] together
with the autocorrelation function (see supplementary in-
formation). to understand the mechanisms behind these
phenomena, it is important to know whether there are
true correlations in these systems. hence for systems
showing fat-tailed inter-event time distributions, there is
a need to develop new measures that are sensitive to cor-
relations but insensitive to fat tails.

fig. 1. activity of single entities with color-coded inter-event
times. (a): sequence of earthquakes at a single location (b):
firing sequence of a single neuron (c): outgoing mobile phone
call sequence of an individual. shorter the time between the
consecutive events darker the color.

in this paper we de   ne a new measure that is capable
of detecting whether temporal correlations are present,
even in the case of heterogeneous signals. by analyzing
the empirical datasets of human communication, earth-
quake activity, and neuron spike trains, we observe uni-
versal features induced by temporal correlations. in the
analysis we establish a close relationship between the ob-
served correlations and memory e   ects and propose a
phenomenological model that implements memory driven
correlated behavior.

abci. results

a. correlated events

a sequence of discrete temporal events can be inter-
preted as a time-dependent point process, x(t), where
x(ti) = 1 at each time step ti when an event takes place,
otherwise x(ti) = 0. to detect bursty clusters in this bi-
nary event sequence we have to identify those events we
consider correlated. the smallest temporal scale at which
correlations can emerge in the dynamics is between con-
secutive events. if only x(t) is known, we can assume two
consecutive actions at ti and ti+1 to be related if they fol-
low each other within a short time interval, ti+1   ti        t
[28, 36]. for events with the duration di this condition
is slightly modi   ed: ti+1     (ti + di)        t.

this de   nition allows us to detect bursty periods, de-
   ned as a sequence of events where each event follows the
previous one within a time interval    t. by counting the
number of events, e, that belong to the same bursty pe-
riod, we can calculate their distribution p (e) in a signal.
for a sequence of independent events, p (e) is uniquely
determined by the inter-event time distribution p (tie) as
follows:

(cid:32)(cid:90)    t

0

(cid:33)n   1(cid:32)

(cid:90)    t

0

1    

p (e = n) =

p (tie)dtie

p (tie)dtie

for n > 0.

integral (cid:82)    t
otherwise if (cid:82)    t

(1)
if the measured time window is    nite, the

0 p (tie)dtie < 1 and p (e = n)     a   (n   1),
0 p (tie)dtie = 1 then p (e = n) = 0
(for related numerical results see si). consequently for
any    nite independent event sequence the p (e) distri-
bution decays exponentially even if the inter-event time
distribution is fat-tailed. deviations from this exponen-
tial behavior indicate correlations in the timing of the
consecutive events.

(cid:33)

1. bursty sequences in human communication

to check the scaling behavior of p (e) in real systems
we focused on outgoing events of individuals in three se-
lected datasets: (a) a mobile-call dataset from a euro-
pean operator; (b) text message records from the same
dataset; (c) email communication sequences [24] (for de-
tailed data description see materials and methods). for
each of these event sequences the distribution of inter-
event times measured between outgoing events are shown
in fig.2 (left bottom panels) and the estimated power-
law exponent values are summarized in table i. to ex-
plore the scaling behavior of the autocorrelation func-
tion, we took the averages over 1, 000 randomly selected
users with maximum time lag of    = 106.
in fig.2.a
and b (right bottom panels) for mobile communication
sequences strong temporal correlation can be observed
(for exponents see table i). the power-law behavior in

2

a(   ) appears after a short period denoting the reaction
time through the corresponding channel and lasts up to
12 hours, capturing the natural rhythm of human activi-
ties. for emails in fig.2.c (right bottom panels) long term
correlation are detected up to 8 hours, which re   ects a
typical o   ce hour rhythm (note that the dataset includes
internal email communication of a university sta   ).

  
0.5
0.6
0.75

mobile-call sequence
short message sequence
email sequence
earthquake sequence (japan) 0.3
1.0
neuron    ring sequence
model
0.7

  
4.1
3.9
2.5
2.5
2.3
3.0

  
0.7
0.7
1.0
0.7
1.1
1.3

  
3.0
2.8
1.3
1.6
1.3
2.0

table i. characteristic exponents of the (  ) autocorrelation
function, (  ) bursty number, (  ) inter-event time distribution
functions and    memory functions (see si) calculated in dif-
ferent datasets and for the model study.

the broad shape of p (tie) and a(   ) functions con-
   rm that human communication dynamics is inhomoge-
neous and displays non-trivial correlations up to    nite
time scales. however, after destroying event-event cor-
relations by shu   ing inter-event times in the sequences
(see materials and methods) the autocorrelation func-
tions still show slow power-law like decay (empty symbols
on bottom right panels), indicating spurious unexpected
dependencies. this clearly demonstrates the disability of
a(   ) to characterize correlations for heterogeneous sig-
nals (for further results see si). however, a more e   ec-
tive measure of such correlations is provided by p (e).
calculating this distribution for various    t windows, we
   nd that the p (e) shows the following scale invariant
behavior

p (e)     e     

(2)

for each of the event sequences as depicted in the main
panels of fig.2. consequently p (e) captures strong tem-
poral correlations in the empirical sequences and it is re-
markably di   erent from p (e) calculated for independent
events, which, as predicted by (1), show exponential de-
cay (empty symbols on the main panels).

exponential behavior of p (e) was also expected from
results published in the literature assuming human com-
munication behavior to be uncorrelated [8, 27, 28]. how-
ever, the observed scaling behavior of p (e) o   ers direct
evidence of correlations in human dynamics, which can
be responsible for the heterogeneous temporal behavior.
these correlations induce long bursty trains in the event
sequence rather than short bursts of independent events.
we have found that the scaling of the p (e) distribu-
tion is quite robust against changes in    t for an extended
regime of time-window sizes (fig.2).
in addition, the
measurements performed on the mobile-call sequences in-
dicate that the p (e) distribution remains fat-tailed also
when it is calculated for users grouped by their activity.

3

fig. 2. the characteristic functions of human communication event sequences. the p (e) distributions with various    t
time-window sizes (main panels), p (tie) distributions (left bottom panels) and average autocorrelation functions (right bottom
panels) calculated for di   erent communication datasets. (a) mobile-call dataset: the scale-invariant behavior was characterized
by power-law functions with exponent values    (cid:39) 0.5,    (cid:39) 4.1 and    (cid:39) 0.7 (b) almost the same exponents were estimated
for short message sequences taking values    (cid:39) 0.6,    (cid:39) 3.9 and    (cid:39) 0.7. (c) email event sequence with estimated exponents
   (cid:39) 0.75,    (cid:39) 2.5 and    = 1.0. empty symbols assign the corresponding calculation results on independent sequences. lanes
labeled with s, m, h and d are denoting seconds, minutes, hours and days respectively.

moreover, the observed scaling behavior of the character-
istic functions remains similar if we remove daily    uctu-
ations (for results see si). these analyses together show
that the detected correlated behavior is not an artifact of
the averaging method nor can be attributed to variations
in activity levels or circadian    uctuations.

2. bursty periods in natural phenomena

as discussed above, temporal

inhomogeneities are
present in the dynamics of several natural phenomena,
e.g.
in recurrent seismic activities at the same loca-
tion [9   11] (for details see materials and methods and
si). the broad distribution of inter-earthquake times in
fig.3.a (right top panel) demonstrates the temporal in-
homogeneities and the long tail of the autocorrelation
function (right bottom panel) assigning long-range tem-
poral correlations. counting the number of earthquakes
belonging to the same bursty period with    t = 2...32
hours window sizes, we obtain a broad p (e) distribution
(see fig.3.a main panel), as observed earlier in commu-
nication sequences, but with a di   erent exponent value
(see in table i). note that the presence of long bursty
trains in earthquake sequences were already assigned to
long temporal correlations by measurements using con-
ditional probabilities [38, 39].

another example of naturally occurring bursty behav-
ior is provided by the    ring patterns of single neurons
(see materials and methods). the recorded neural spike
sequences display correlated and strongly inhomogeneous
temporal bursty behavior, as shown in fig.3.b. the dis-
tributions of the length of neural spike trains are found

to be fat-tailed and indicate the presence of correlations
between consecutive bursty spikes of the same neuron.

3. memory process

in each studied system (communication of individu-
als, earthquakes at a given location, or single neurons)
qualitatively similar behavior was detected as the sin-
gle entities performed independent events or they passed
through longer correlated bursty cascades. these cas-
cades can be viewed as the result of building up some
stress in the system (even at the single component level)
e.g. the accumulation of important tasks in human com-
munication, mechanical stress preceding an earthquake
or integrated stimuli to a neuron. our hypothesis is that
each bursty period is related to a single excitation that
triggers a cascade relieving this stress, which would nat-
urally explain the correlation between the events within
the same train. this    one cascade-one task    hypothe-
sis can be relevant for human communication, where we
speculate that a single task execution can occasionally
trigger a series of events responsible for the appearance
of long bursty trains. this assumption is supported by
the observation that bursty nodes communicate predom-
inantly with only one of their neighbors [28, 40], indicat-
ing that a bursty period maybe linked to a single task.
for earthquakes we can make the same conjecture, since
a bursty period of earthquakes at a given time and loca-
tion are most likely related to the same seismic activity.
in case of neurons, the    rings take place in bursty spike
trains when the neuron receives excitatory input and its
membrane potential exceeds a given potential threshold

abc4

empirical sequences for trains with size smaller than the
longest train, it is possible to have p(n) = 1 since the
corresponding id203 would be p (e = n) = 0. at
the same time due to the    nite size of the data sequence
the length of the longest bursty train is limited such that
p(n) shows a    nite cuto   .

we can use the memory function to simulate a se-
quence of correlated events.
if the simulated sequence
satis   es the scaling condition in (2) we can derive the
corresponding memory function by substituting (2) into
(3), leading to:

(cid:18) n

(cid:19)  

n + 1

p(n) =

with the scaling relation (see si):

   =    + 1.

(4)

(5)

fig. 3. the characteristic functions of event sequences of
natural phenomena. the p (e) distributions of correlated
event numbers with various    t time-window sizes (main pan-
els), p (tie) distributions (right top panels) and average auto-
correlation functions (right bottom panels). (a) one station
records of japanese earthquake sequences from 1986 to 1998.
the functional behavior is characterized by the    tted power-
law functions with corresponding exponents    (cid:39) 0.3,    (cid:39) 2.5
and    (cid:39) 0.7. inter-event times for p (tie) were counted with 10
second resolution. (b) firing sequences of single neurons with
2 millisecond resolution. the corresponding exponents take
values as    (cid:39) 1.0,    (cid:39) 2.3 and    (cid:39) 1.1. empty symbols as-
sign the calculation results on independent sequences. lanes
labeled with ms, s, m, h, d and w are denoting milliseconds,
seconds, minutes, hours, days and weeks respectively.

[41]. the spikes    red in a single train are correlated since
they are the result of the same excitation and their    ring
frequency is coding the amplitude of the incoming stimuli
[42].

the correlations taking place between consecutive
bursty events can be interpreted as a memory process,
allowing us to calculate the id203 that the entity
will perform one more event within a    t time frame af-
ter it executed n events previously in the actual cascade.
this id203 can be written as:

(cid:80)   
(cid:80)   

e=n+1 p (e)
e=n p (e)

p(n) =

.

(3)

therefore the memory function, p(n), gives a di   erent
representation of the distribution p (e). the p(n) calcu-
lated for the mobile call sequence are shown in fig.4.a for
trains detected with di   erent window sizes. note that in

in order to check whether (5) holds for real systems
and whether the memory function in (4) describes cor-
rectly the memory in real processes we compare it to
a memory function extracted from an empirical p (e)
distributions. we selected the p (e) distribution of the
mobile call dataset with    t = 600 second and derived
the corresponding p(n) function. the complement of the
memory function, 1    p(n), is presented in fig.4.b where
we show the original function with strong    nite size ef-
fects (grey dots) and the same function after logarithmic
binning (black dots).

taking equation (4) we    t the theoretical memory
function to the log-binned empirical results using least-
squares method with only one free parameter,   . we
   nd that the best    t o   ers an excellent agreement with
the empirical data (see fig.4.b and also fig.4.a) with
   = 2.971  0.072. this would indicate    (cid:39) 3.971 through
(5), close to the approximated value    (cid:39) 4.1, obtained
from directly    tting the empirical p (e) distributions in
the main panel of fig.2.a (for    ts of other datasets see si).
in order to validate whether our approximation is cor-
rect we take the theoretical memory function p(n) of the
form (4) with parameter    = 2.971 and generate bursty
trains of 108 events. as shown in fig.5.c, the scaling of
the p (e) distribution obtained for the simulated event
trains is similar to the empirical function, demonstrating
the validity of the chosen analytical form for the memory
function.

model study

as the systems we analysed are of quite di   erent na-
ture, from physics (earthquakes) to social (human com-
munication) and biological (neuron spikes) systems,    nd-
ing a single mechanistic model to    t them all is virtually
impossible. therefore, our goal is to de   ne a phenomeno-
logical model that captures common features of the ob-
served dynamics and see how these features are related
to each other.

ab5

fig. 4. empirical and    tted memory functions of the mobile call sequence (a) memory function calculated from the mobile
call sequence using di   erent    t time windows. (b) 1    p(n) complement of the memory function measured from the mobile call
sequence with    t = 600 second and    tted with the analytical curve de   ned in equation (4) with    = 2.971. grey symbols are
the original points, while black symbols denotes the same function after logarithmic binning. (c) p (e) distributions measured
in real and in modeled event sequences.

excited state the inter-event time for the actual event
comes from fb(tie) after which the system decides to
execute one more excited event in state b with a prob-
ability p(n) that depends on the number n of excited
events since the last event in normal state. otherwise it
switches back to a normal state with id203 1   p(n).
note that a similar model without memory was already
de   ned in the literature [43].

4. reinforcement dynamics with memory

we assume that the investigated systems can be de-
scribed with a two-state model, where an entity can be
in a normal state a, executing independent events with
longer inter-event times, or in an excited state b, per-
forming correlated events with higher frequency, corre-
sponding to the observed bursts. to induce the inter-
event times between the consecutive events we apply a
reinforcement process based on the assumption that the
longer the system waits after an event, the larger the
id203 that it will keep waiting. such dynamics
shows strongly heterogeneous temporal features as dis-
cussed in [32, 33]. for our two-state model system we
de   ne a process, where the generation of the actual inter-
event time depends on the current state of the system.
the inter-event times are induced by the reinforcement
functions that give the id203 to wait one time unit
longer after the system has waited already time tie since
the last event. these functions are de   ned as

fa,b(tie) =

(6)

(cid:18) tie

(cid:19)  a,b

tie + 1

where   a and   b control the reinforcement dynamics in
state a and b, respectively. these functions follow the
same form as the previously de   ned memory function in
(4) and satisfy the corresponding scaling relation in (5).
if   a (cid:28)   b the characteristic inter-event times at state
a and b become fairly di   erent, which induces further
temporal inhomogeneities in the dynamics. the actual
state of the system is determined by transition proba-
bilities shown in fig.5.b, where to introduce correlations
between consecutive excited events performed in state b
we utilize the memory function de   ned in equation (4).
to be speci   c, the model is de   ned as follows:    rst the
system performs an event in a randomly chosen initial
state. if the last event was in the normal state a, it waits
for a time induced by fa(tie), after which it switches to
excited state b with id203    and performs an event
in the excited state, or with id203 1       stays in the
normal state a and executes a new normal event. in the

fig. 5. schematic de   nition and numerical results of the
model study. (a) p (e) distributions of the synthetic sequence
after logarithmic binning with window sizes    t = 1...1024.
the    tted power-law function has an exponent    = 3.0.
(b) transition probabilities of the reinforcement model with
memory. (c) logarithmic binned inter-event time distribution
of the simulated process with a maximum inter-event time
tmax
ie = 106. the corresponding exponent value is    = 1.3.
(d) the average logarithmic binned autocorrelation function
with a maximum lag    max = 104. the function can be charac-
terized by an exponent    = 0.7. simulation results averaged
over 1000 independent realizations with parameters   a = 0.3,
  b = 5.0,    = 2.0,    = 0.1 and t = 109. for the calculation
we chose the maximum inter-event time tmax
ie = 105, which is
large enough not to in   uence short temporal behavior, but it
increases the program performance considerably.

the numerical results predicted by the model are sum-
marized in fig.5 and table i. we    nd that the inter-

abcbp(n)a  1   1   p(n)  abcdevent time distribution in fig.5.c re   ects strong inho-
mogeneities as it takes the form of a scale-free function
with an exponent value    = 1.3, satisfying the relation
   =   a + 1. as a result of the heterogeneous tempo-
ral behavior with memory involved, we detected spon-
taneously evolving long temporal correlations as the au-
tocorrelation function shows a power-law decay. its ex-
ponent    = 0.7 (see fig.5.d) also satis   es the relation
   +    = 2 (see si). the p (e) distribution also shows fat-
tailed behavior for each investigated window size ranging
from    t = 1 to 210 (see fig.5.a). the overall signal here
is an aggregation of correlated long bursty trains and
uncorrelated single events. this explains the weak    t
dependence of p (e) for larger window sizes, where more
independent events are merged with events of correlated
bursty cascades, which induces deviation of p (e) from
the expected scale-free behavior. the p (e) distributions
can be characterized by an exponent    = 3.0 in agree-
ment with the analytical result in (5) and it con   rms the
presence of correlated bursty cascades. in addition, even
if we    x the value of    and   , the    exponent satis   es the
condition    <    <   , an inequality observed in empirical
data (see table i).

ii. discussion

in the present study we introduced a new measure, the
number of correlated events in bursty cascades, which
detects correlations and heterogeneity in temporal se-
quences. it o   ers a better characterization of correlated
heterogeneous signals, capturing a behavior that cannot
be observed from the inter-event time distribution and
the autocorrelation function. the discussed strongly het-
erogeneous dynamics was documented in a wide range
of systems, from human dynamics to natural phenom-
ena. the time evolution of these systems were found to
be driven by temporal correlations that induced scale-
invariant distributions of the burst lengths. this scale-
free feature holds for each studied systems and can be
characterized by di   erent system-dependent exponents,
indicating a new universal property of correlated tempo-
ral patterns emerging in complex systems.

we found that the bursty trains can be explained in
terms of memory e   ects, which can account for the het-
erogeneous temporal behavior. in order to better under-
stand the dynamics of temporally correlated bursty pro-
cesses at single entity level we introduced a phenomeno-
logical model that captures the common features of the
investigated empirical systems and helps us understand
the role they play during the temporal evolution of het-
erogeneous processes.

6

iii. materials and methods

data processing. to study correlated human behav-
ior we selected three datasets containing time-stamped
records of communication through di   erent channels for
a large number of individuals. for each user we extract
the sequence of outgoing events as we are interested in
the correlated behavior of single entities. the datasets
we have used are as follows: (a) a mobile-call dataset
from a european operator covering     325    106 million
voice call records of     6.5    106 users during 120 days
[5]. (b) text message records from the same dataset con-
sisting of 125.5   106 events between the same number of
users. note that to consider only trusted social relations
these events were executed between users who mutually
called each other at least one time during the examined
period. consecutive text messages of the same user with
waiting times smaller than 10 seconds were considered
as a single multipart message [45] though the p (tie) and
a(   ) functions do not take values smaller than 10 sec-
onds in fig.2.b. (c) email communication sequences of
2, 997 individuals including 20.2    104 events during 83
days [24]. from the email sequence the multicast emails
(consecutive emails sent by the same user to many other
with inter-event time 0) were removed in order to study
temporally separated communication events of individ-
uals. to study earthquake sequences we used a catalog
that includes all earthquake events in japan with mag-
nitude larger than two between 1986 and 1998 [12]. we
considered each recorded earthquake as a unique event
regardless whether it was a main-shock or an after-shock.
for the single station measurement we collected a time
order list of earthquakes with epicenters detected at the
same region [7, 11] (for other event collection methods see
si). the resulting data consists of 198, 914 events at 238
di   erent regions. the utilized neuron    ring sequences
consist of 31, 934 outgoing    ring events of 1, 052 single
neurons which were collected with 2 millisecond resolu-
tion from rat   s hippocampal slices using fmci techniques
[47, 48].

inter-event time shu   ing of real sequences. for
the independent event sequences in fig.2 and 3 (empty
symbols) we shu   ed the inter-event times of individuals
allowing to change the inter-event time values between
any users but keeping the original event number for each
individual. the presented p (e) distributions were cal-
culated with one    t window size to demonstrate the ex-
ponential behavior of p (e) for independent events.

acknowledgments

we thank j. saram  aki, h-h. jo, m. kivel  a, c. song
and d. wang for comments and useful discussions. fi-
nancial support from eus fp7 fet-open to ictecol-
lective project no. 238597 and tekes (fidipro) are
acknowledged.

7

[1] corral   a (2004) long-term id91, scaling, and uni-
versality in the temporal occurrence of earthquakes.
phys. rev. lett. 92:108501.

[2] wheatland ms, sturrock pa (1998) the waiting-time
distribution of solar flare hard x-ray bursts. astrophys.
j. 509:448.

[3] kemuriyama t, et.al. (2010) a power-law distribution of
inter-spike intervals in renal sympathetic nerve activity in
salt-sensitive hypertension-induced chronic heart failure.
biosystems 101:144.

[4] barab  asi al (2005) the origin of bursts and heavy tails

in human dynamics. nature 435:207.

[5] oliveira jg, barab  asi al (2005) human dynamics:
darwin and einstein correspondence patterns. nature
437:1251.

[6] barab  asi al (2010) bursts: the hidden pattern behind

everything we do. (dutton books).

[7] bak p, christensen k, danon l, scanlon t (2002) uni   ed
scaling law for earthquakes. phys. rev. lett. 88:178501.
[8] bak p (1996) how nature works: the science of self-
organized criticality (copernicus, springer-verlag, new
york).

[9] jensen hj (1996) self-organized criticality: emergent
complex behavior in physical and biological systems
(cambridge university press, cambridge).

[10] paczuski m, maslov s, bak p (1996) avalanche dynamics
in evolution, growth, and depinning models. phys. rev.
e. 53:414.

[11] zapperi s, lauritsen kb, stanley he (1995) self-
organized branching processes: mean-field theory for
avalanches. phys. rev. lett. 75:4071.

[12] beggs jm, plenz d (2003) neuronal avalanches in neo-

cortical circuits. j. neurosci. 23:11167.

[13] lippiello e, de arcangelis l, godano c (2008) in   uence
of time and space correlations on earthquake magni-
tude. phys. rev. lett. 100:038501.

[14] de arcangelis l, godano c, lippiello e, nicodemi m
(2006) universality in solar flare and earthquake oc-
currence. phys. rev. lett. 96:051102.

[15] brunk gg (2001) self organized criticality: a new the-
ory of political behaviour and some of its implications.
b.j.pol.s. 31:427.

[16] ramos rt, sassib rb, piqueira jrc (2011) self-
organized criticality and the predictability of human be-
havior. new.id.psy. 29:38 (2011).

[17] kepecs a, lisman j (2003) information encoding and
computation with spikes and bursts. network: comput.
neural. syst. 14:103.

[18] grace aa, bunney bs (1984) the control of    ring pat-
tern in nigral dopamine neurons: burst    ring. j. neu-
rosci. 4:2877.

[19] smalley rf, chatelain jl, turcotte dl, pr  evot r (1987)
a fractal approach to the id91 of earthquakes: ap-
plications to the seismicity of the new hebrides. bull.
seism. soc. am. 77:1368.

[20] udias a, rice j (1975). statistical analysis of mi-
croearthquake activity near san andreas geophysical ob-
servatory, hollister, california. bull. seism. soc. am.
65:809.

[21] zhao x, omi t, matsuno n, shinomoto s (2010) a non-
universal aspect in the temporal occurrence of earth-

quakes. new. j. phys. 12:063010.

[22] v  azquez a, et.al. (2006) modeling bursts and heavy tails

in human dynamics. phys. rev. e 73:036127.

[23] goh ki, barab  asi al (2008) burstiness and memory in

complex systems. europhys. lett. 81:48002.

[24] eckmann jp, moses e, sergi d (2004) id178 of dia-
logues creates coherent structures in e-mail tra   c. proc.
natl. acad. sci. (usa) 101:14333.

[25] pica ciamarra m, coniglio a, de arcangelis l (2008)
correlations and omori law in spanning. eur.phys.lett.
84:28004.

[26] ratkiewicz j, fortunato s, flammini a, menczer
f, vespignani a (2010) characterizing and modeling
the dynamics of online popularity. phys. rev. lett.
105:158701.

[27] malmgren rd, stou   er db, motter ae, amarala lan
(2008) a poissonian explanation for heavy tails in e-mail
communication. proc. natl. acad. sci. (usa) 105:18153.
[28] wu, y., et al. (2010) evidence for a bimodal distribution
in human communication. proc. natl. acad. sci. (usa)
107:18803.

[29] jo hh, karsai m, kert  esz j, kaski k (2011) circadian
pattern and burstiness in human communication activity.
arxiv:1101.0377.

[30] cattuto c, et.al. (2010) dynamics of person-to-person in-
teractions from distributed rfid sensor networks. plos
one 5:e11596.

[31] takaguchi t, nakamura m, sato n, yano k, masuda n
(2011) predictability of conversation partners. phys. rev.
x 1:011008.

[32] stehl  e j, barrat a, bianconi g (2010) dynamical and
bursty interactions in social networks. phys. rev. e
81:035101.

[33] zhao k, stehl  e j, bianconi g, barrat a (2011) social
network dynamics of face-to-face interactions. phys. rev.
e 83:056109.

[34] saichev a, sornette d (2006) universal distribution
of interearthquake times explained. phys. rev. lett.
97:078501.

[35] hansen a, mathiesen j (2006) survey of scaling surface
modelling critical and catastrophic phenomena in geo-
science, lecture notes in physics 705:93 (springer).

[36] turnbull l, dian e, gross g (2005) the string method of
burst identi   cation in neuronal spike trains. j. neurosci.
meth. 145:23.

[37] anteneodo c, malmgren rd, chialvo dr (2010) pois-
sonian bursts in e-mail correspondence. eur. phys. j. b
75:389.

[38] bunde a, eichner jf, kantelhardt jw, havlin s (2005)
long-term memory: a natural mechanism for the clus-
tering of extreme events and anomalous residual times
in climate records. phys. rev. lett. 94:048701.

[39] livina vn, havlin s, bunde ahe (2005) memory in the
occurrence of earthquakes. phys. rev. lett. 95:208501.
[40] kovanen l, karsai m, kaski k, kert  esz j, saram  aki j
(2011) temporal motifs in time-dependent networks. j.
stat. mech. p11005.

[41] nicholls jg, martin ar, wallace bg, fuchs pa (1991)
from neuron to brain. 4th ed. (sinauer associates inc.).
[42] kandel e, schwartz j, jessel tm (1991) principles of

neural science (elsevier, new york).

[43] kleinberg j (2003) bursty and hierarchical structure in

[46] japan university network earthquake catalog file

streams. data mining and knowledge discovery 7:373.

earthquake research institute (university of tokyo).

[44] karsai m, et.al. (2011) small but slow world: how net-
work topology and burstiness slow down spreading. phys.
rev. e. 83:025102(r).

[45] kovanen l (2009) structure and dynamics of a large-
scale complex network. (master   s thesis) aalto university
(helsinki, finland).

[47] ikegaya y, et.al. (2004) syn   re chains and cortical songs:

temporal modules of cortical activity. science 304:559.

[48] takahashi n, sasaki t, usami a, matsuki n, ikegaya y
(2007) watching neuronal circuit dynamics through func-
tional multineuron calcium imaging (fmci). neurosci.
res. 58:219.

8

universal features of correlated bursty behaviour

supplementary informations

m. karsai, k. kaski, a.-l. barab  asi and j. kert  esz

9

iv. scaling of the autocorrelation function in heterogeneous independent

processes

as it was mentioned in the main text for strongly inhomogeneous temporal sequences of independent events the
hurst exponent can take a value h > 1/2 and can assign false positive temporal correlations [1]. this e   ective
behaviour is also re   ected by the autocorrelation function which can show power-law scaling a(   )             for sequences
     
of independent events with inter-event time distribution p (tie)     t
ie , and can indicate presence of non-existing
correlations. based on the generating function method and the tauberian theorems one can show that for 1            2
the scaling law

   +    = 2

(7)

holds [2]. we checked this relationship by numerical simulations, where we generate independent events with inter-
event times sampled from a power-law distribution with a    xed exponent    and calculate the autocorrelation function.
as it is shown in fig.6.a the exponent relation in eq.7 holds for numerical results since for p (tie) with    = 1.5 (blue
symbols and straight line) the e   ective autocorrelation function (red symbols) scales as a power-law with an exponent
   = 0.5 (dashed line). at the same time the p (e) distribution calculated with    t = 10 window size (green symbols)
indicates the true uncorrelated behaviour as it shows exponential decay.

fig. 6. the characteristic functions calculated for heterogeneous independent signals. (a) p (tie), a(   ) and p (e)
functions for    = 1.5. solid line is a power-law function with the given    exponent value, while dashed line denotes a a power-
law function with an e   ective    = 0.5 exponent value. (b) a(   ) e   ective autocorrelation functions for various    exponents.
straight lines are denoting power-law functions with    exponents satisfying the    +    = 2 relation. (c) corresponding p (e)
distributions for various    exponents.

the same calculations had been repeated for various 1            2 values averaged over 1000 independent realization as
we present it in fig.6.b. in each cases the autocorrelation function satis   es the condition derived in eq.11. however,
as        1 extreme    uctuations start to in   uence the dynamics considerably, while some discrepancy appears as        2
where fully correlated behaviour should evolve which cannot be the case for random processes even the    uctuations
are    nite.

the corresponding p (e) distributions show exponential behaviour as it is demonstrated in fig.6.c and assign the
true uncorrelated temporal behaviour of the processes.
it demonstrates that autocorrelation is unable to address
present correlations obviously for heterogeneous temporal processes since it indicates e   ective correlations between
independent events. however, the p (e) distribution is capable to detect correlated behaviour even for processes with
fat-tailed inter-event time distributions as it decays exponentially in case of independent signals (for a detailed study
see si section v) while it scales as a power-law when long bursty periods evolve as a result of temporal correlations.

abcv. p(e) distributon in independent models

10

we study the functional behavior of the p (e) bursty event number distribution for processes of independent events.
as it was already discussed in the main text the p (e) distribution with a given    t time window size can be written
as:

(cid:32)(cid:90)    t

0

(cid:33)n   1(cid:32)

(cid:90)    t

0

1    

(cid:33)

p (e = n) =

p (tie)dtie

p (tie)dtie

(8)

if the integral(cid:82)    t

0 p (tie)dtie < 1, then p (e = n)     a   (n   1) is decreasing exponentially, otherwise if(cid:82)    t

for n > 0 in case of processes where we sample tie inter-event times independently from an arbitrary p (tie) distribution.
0 p (tie)dtie = 1
then p (e = n) = 0. since we    x the upper limit of the integrand    t <    , the    rst behavior holds.

to numerically con   rm this analytical results we de   ne a single user model where we generate events with inter-event

times sampled from two di   erent distributions:

p (tie)     t     

and

p (tie)     e   t/  

(9)

and count the number of consecutive events which fall into a bursty periods with tie        t.

fig. 7. p(e) distributor in independent models. distribution of number of bursty events in periods evolved in independent
processes with (a) power-law and (b) exponential inter-event time distributions. simulation results are presented with various
parameter values and with    xed    t and maximum inter-event times.

the simulation results in fig.7 demonstrates the predicted exponential decay for the p (e) distributions. we
performed sequences with various    or    values, but the p (e) distribution was calculated in each cases with a    xed
   t window size.

vi.    t time window dependence of p (e) distribution

fig. 8. illustration of bursty period detection in the call sequence of a selected individual. black spikes denote the
call events with width rational to the call length. in the 2-5 lines we colored the inter-event periods if they were smaller then
the corresponding time window size. as we are increasing    t the periods which were detected with smaller time-windows are
be merged together to longer trains. the    rst line demonstrates the    ne grained self-containing structure of the long evolving
bursty periods.

abt=100s   tit=300s   tit=600s   ti6h8h10h12h14h16h18h20ht=3600s   tiwe have seen in the main text that the p (e) bursty train size distribution shows a robust behaviour against the
selected    t time windows. by increasing    t the correlated event clusters are growing as more and more single events
and periods with shorter time windows get merged together as depicted in fig.8. looking for a wider range of    t
from 1 second (the time resolution of the mobile-call sequences) up to t = 120 days (the length of the data sequence)
we can follow how p (e) distribution evolves. in fig.9.a we present p (e) distributions with    t = 2n where n goes
from 1 to 24. a lower tl

c characteristic time can be detected by looking at the evolution of p (e):

c and a higher th

11

    if    t < tl
    if tl

c <    t < th

insensitive for    t.

c: only small bursty trains evolve and the p (e) distributions show a concave behaviour.

c : critical regime where the p (e) distributions are scaling as a power-law with an exponent   

    if    t > th

c : uncorrelated periods are merged together and p (e) is approaching the strength distribution as

   t     t days where for each user only one bursty period evolves containing all events of the present user.
for the mobile call sequence the corresponding exponent takes    = 4.1 and the two characteristic times are tl
c = 20
seconds and th
c = 12 hours. these times are also play crucial roles for p (tie) and a(   ) as 20 seconds is the typical
reaction time between two consecutive call actions, while 12 hours re   ects the length of correlated periods of human
daily activity. looking at the scaling behaviour of p (tie) and a(   ) of other human activities, earthquakes or neuron
spike sequences, one can detect analogous evolving behaviour of p (e) with corresponding characteristic times.

fig. 9. distribution of correlated bursty event numbers with various time-window size. p (e) distribution calcu-
lated for various    t window size with value varying between    t = 21...224. straight lines are denoting the lower characteristic
time tl
c = 12 hours (dashed line) and assign power-law functions
with exponent    (cid:39) 4.1.

c = 20 seconds (solid line) and the higher characteristic time th

to exclude the possibility that the broad strength distribution causes the power law like p (e) behaviour, we
repeated the same measurement with a single event sequence which was constructed from the call sequences of 106
users and monitor how p (e) changes as we increase    t from its minimum to its maximum (not shown here). in this
case we also observed a extended critical regime where p (e) presented scale-free behaviour with the same exponent
   (cid:39) 4.1.

vii. strength decomposition of the characteristic functions

we demonstrated in the main text that bursty correlated behavior can be characterized by functions as p (tie),
a(   ) and p (e) in several kind of dynamic systems. however, the question remained whether the observed scaling
behaviour of these functions is an artifact of other present inhomogeneities e.g. the broad distribution of node activity
(strength), or it de facto re   ects general behavioural characteristics of entities. to answer this question we completed
additional measurements on the mobile-call dataset which possesses large enough size to provide good statistics after
we decompose users into di   erent groups. we also repeated the following measurements for the other datasets and
found similar behaviour of the analyzed functions.

here we de   ne node strength s as the number of (in and out) calls made by a user during the entire period. it
is known from earlier studies [4] that the p (s) strength distribution of the mcd is broad with a maximum value

12

fig. 10. characteristic functions of di   erent strength groups. (a) inter-event time distributions measured between
the outgoing calls of individuals belonging to the same strength group (see text). the solid line assigns a power-law function
with exponent    = 0.7. (b) the same curves scaled by using the (cid:104)ts
ie denotes the inter-event
ie(cid:105) assigns the average inter-event time calculated for users with strength s.
times of individuals with a given s strength and (cid:104)ts
(c) autocorrelation function averaged for users belonging to di   erent strength groups. characteristic exponents are changing
between    = 0.7 (solid line) and    = 0.38 (dashed line) as the strength of the corresponding groups is increasing. (d) p (e)
distribution for users belonging to di   erent strength groups. the corresponding exponents are changing between    = 2.45
(dashed line) and    = 4.3 (solid line).

ie) = (cid:101)p (ts

ie(cid:105)) where ts

ie(cid:105)p (ts

ie/(cid:104)ts

smax = 7933 in the present case. take into consideration the inhomogeneous p (s) distribution we ranked users into
strength groups with increasing bin size. we realized from individual level analysis that users with the largest strength
values are playing a disparate role as they show non-human like communication patterns. though we exclude them
from the measurements and take users only with strength smaller then 96% of the maximum value.

in fig.10 we present the average characteristic functions calculated separately for each strength groups. hetero-
geneous inter-event time distributions are characterizing the communication of users ranked into di   erent groups
(fig.10.a). only the tail of the p (tie) distributions show signi   cant discrepancy due to di   erent activity levels. since
users frequently show correlated bursts with short inter-event times, those ones with small number of calls in sum
have longer inactive periods between bursts which induces a longer tail in p (tie) with a later exponential cuto   . users
with higher activity have shorter waiting times between bursts which is re   ected by the earlier turning point of the
inter-event time distribution. in order to proof whether these distributions are broad not only due to the inhomoge-
neous strength distributions in fig.10.b we scaled them together using the scaling relation (cid:104)ts
ie(cid:105))
ie(cid:105) denoted the average inter-event times, calculated separately for each groups as it was done in [5, 6]. using
where (cid:104)ts
this scaling relation the distributions scale together on the same master curve which indicates that p (tie) follows the
same functional behaviour independently from the chosen strength group (and the average inter-event time of this
group).

ie) = (cid:101)p (ts

ie(cid:105)p (ts

ie/(cid:104)ts

the autocorrelation function in fig.10.c decays as a power-law up to 12 hours assigning long-temporal correlations
for users in each strength groups. naturally stronger correlations are detected for more active users as the corre-
sponding exponents vary between    (cid:39) 0.38...0.7 as we decrease the activity level. a similar behaviour is con   rmed
by the scaling of p (e) in fig.10.d as the distributions (calculated with    t = 600 seconds) remain fat-tailed for each
user groups with an exponent between    = 2.45...4.3 as we decrease activity. it implies that long correlated bursty
periods evolve even for users with only a few calls but with smaller id203 then for users with many call actions.

abcdviii. de-seasoned results

13

in order to study the e   ect of circadian patterns on the observed behaviour of the characteristic functions in mobile
call communication, we remove daily    uctuations by rescaling the event times using a method de   ned in [7, 8].
measuring the r(t) event density and its average value rt during the entire period we can de   ne a rescaled time for
each event as:

dt    =

r(t)
rt

dt =   (t)dt

(10)

where   (t) denotes the event rate and the      (t   )dt    =   (t)dt scaling holds for the time variable with      (t   ) = 1.
rescaling event times with these conditions, events in periods with high event frequency become dilated, while event
times are contracted when their frequency is lower, so the e   ect of cyclic    uctuations can be reduced. we rescaled
the times of the outgoing call events of each user in the mcd considering the duration of their calls and ranked them
into strength groups using their overall call activity.

fig. 11. characteristic functions of de-seasoned sequences. (a) autocorrelation functions and (b) inter-event time
distributions of de-seasoned outgoing call event sequences of individuals belonging to the same strength groups. dashed line on
panel (a) assigns a power-law function with exponent    = 0.65 while on panel (b) with exponent    = 0.7. (c) p (e) distributions
measured with various    t time window size in the de-seasoned outgoing event sequences of individuals. the slope of the dashed
straight line indicates an exponent value    = 4.1. (d) p (e) distribution with    t = 600 measured for users belonging to di   erent
strength groups. the solid (dashed) line denotes a power-law function with exponent 4.6 (2.8.)

utilizing the sequence of outgoing call events with rescaled times we calculate the three characteristic functions to
see the impact of daily    uctuations on them. since cyclic    uctuations are introducing correlations in the dynamics, by
removing them the a(   ) function should re   ect weaker correlations and if only the circadian patterns are responsible
for the temporal correlations this function should radically change and present short term correlated behaviour only.
in fig.11.a the autocorrelation denotes reduced correlated behaviour compare to the same function of the original
event sequence in fig.10.c, however it signi   es remaining long temporal correlations as it shows slow decay with a
slightly larger exponent    (cid:39) 0.75 compared to the unscaled value (   = 0.5). the inter-event time distributions in
fig.11.b also remains similar compared to fig.10.a with approximately the same exponent value    (cid:39) 0.7. it is in
complete agreement with the results presented in [7] where the p (tie) of call events remained unchanged after the
same de-seasoning method was applied on the event sequence.

long bursty periods are not destroyed by removing daily patterns from the event sequence as it is shown in
fig.11.c. the long periods of outgoing bursts of individuals remain for various    t values re   ected by power-law like
p (e) distributions decreasing with exponent    (cid:39) 4.1 similar to the original sequence. the p (e) distribution becomes

abcdabcdabc14

more disperse if we decompose it by strength for periods with time window size    t = 600 seconds (see fig.11.d).
the tail of the decomposed p (e) distributions can be estimated with exponents between    (cid:39) 2.8...4.6. consequently
as the scaling behaviour of the de-seasoned data show similar behaviour as the original sequence, it implies that
even circadian    uctuations are partially responsible for the present correlations they do not e   ect considerably the
evolution of long correlated bursty sequence in communication of individuals.

ix. bursty-topology correlations in earthquake-sequences

in order to measure temporal correlations between earthquake events we applied a so-called single-station method
[9   11] and studied event sequences executed at the same geographical area. for each earthquake event the longitude
and latitude coordinates of the epicenter was known from informations measured at several surrounding seismological
stations [12]. the distribution of epicenters on the investigated area is visualized on fig.12.a.

fig. 12. (a) earthquake events in japan between 1985.07-1998.12. count of earthquake events located into area bins with size
(b) 100km2, (c) 104km2 and (d) 104km2.

for the results presented in the main text we grouped 198, 914 events into 238 administrative regions and we observed
scale-free behaviour for the characteristic functions (see fig.3.a in the main text). however, since the regions can have
di   erent sizes the question remains whether the observed scaling behaviour is the result of the diverse size distribution
of di   erent regions or it truly assigns heterogeneous correlated temporal behaviour. to answer this question we divided
the investigated area for bins with equal sizes and for each bin we collected a time-ordered list of events executed on
the corresponding area. we used three di   erent bin sizes: 100km2, 102km2 and 104km2. the event count map with
the three di   erent bin sizes is shown in fig.12.b, c and d.

using the event sequences collected for each bins we calculated the characteristic function p (tie), a(   ) and p (e).
as it is shown in fig.13 each function remained fat tailed with the same exponent values    = 2.5 and    = 0.7 as
it was found for the measurements presented in the main text. the autocorrelation function exponent took a value
   = 0.25 which assigns slightly stronger correlations as for the earlier calculations, however the average autocorrelation
functions here were calculated for the    rst 100 most active bins which explains the slight decrease of the    exponent.

fig. 13. characteristic functions: (a) p (tie), (b) a(   ) and (c) p (e) calculated for sequences collected with area bin sizes
100km2 (blue), 102km2 (red) and 104km2 (grey). the autocorrelation functions on (b) were averaged for the    rst 100 most
active bins with the corresponding size. on (c) the di   erent symbols denote the p (e) distributions calculated with di   erent
   t time window sizes.

as the scaling behaviour of the characteristic functions were re-found for calculations with equal-size area bins, in

abcdabcdabcabcdabcdabcconclusion we can say that the observed temporal correlations and heterogeneous dynamics are not the result of the
event collection method but they truly characterize the sequences of earthquake events.

15

x. calculation of the memory function

in the main text for correlated event sequences with p (e)     e      we can derive the memory function in the form:

p(n) =

(cid:19)  

(cid:18) n
(cid:19)  
(cid:18) i

n + 1

i=1

i + 1
(1 + n   1)       1

(n + 1)  

=

(cid:18)

1    

(cid:18) n

(cid:19)  (cid:19) i=n   1(cid:89)

p (e = n) =

=
   

n + 1
(n + 1)       n  
(n + 1)  n   =
n(n + 1)         

  

n  +1

(cid:18) n

(cid:19)  (cid:19)(cid:18) 1

n + 1

n

(cid:18)
(cid:16)

1    

=

1 +   

n +   (  +1)

2

1
n2 + ...

(n + 1)  

(cid:19)  
(cid:17)     1

=

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

   

however, by only knowing eq.11 we can also calculate the related p (e) distribution as:

consequently our calculations are consistent as the corresponding p (e) distribution shows asymptotically a power-law
decay with an exponent satisfying the relation:

   =    + 1.

(15)

xi. estimating exponent    for empirical memory functions

fig. 14. fitted complement memory functions of di   erent empirical data sequences calculated with a selected
time-window size. (a) mobile call sequence (   t = 600 seconds). (b) text message sequence (   t = 300 seconds). (c) email
sequence (   t = 3600 seconds). (d) japanese earthquake sequence (   t = 16 hours). (e) neuron    ring sequence (   t = 900
milliseconds).

in order to estimate the    memory function exponents for empirical sequences we calculated the p(n) function for
each investigated data sequence with a chosen    t time window size and plot the complement 1     p(n) of the original

 0.01 0.1 1 1 10 100 10001-p(n)noriginal    t=600 stheo   =2.971+/- 0.072 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 1 10 100 10001-p(n)noriginal    t=300 stheo   =2.795+/- 0.032 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 1 10 100 10001-p(n)noriginal    t=3600 stheo   =1.307+/- 0.293 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 1 10 100 10001-p(n)noriginal    t=57600 stheo   =1.555+/- 0.021 0.01 0.1 1 1 10 100 10001-p(n)noriginal    t=9000 mstheo   =1.335+/- 0.069abcde16

memory functions in fig.14 (grey symbols) and the same functions after logarithmic binning (black symbols). as it
is visible the original complement memory functions show strong    nite size e   ects as the investigated event sequences
span on a limited time frame and the related p (e) distributions are    nite. similarly as it was discussed in the
main text, we    tted the binned empirical memory functions with the analytical functions of the form of eq.11 using
least-squares method with only one free parameter, the exponent    (red lines in fig.14). the resulted    exponents are
written in the    gure caption and also summarized in the main text in table i. the derived exponents approximately
satisfy the relation in eq.15 with the corresponding empirical    values.

the actual p(n) memory functions take the analytical form eq.11 if we assume that the p (e) distribution is a power-
law function with an exponent   . however, the    tted curves show deviations from the empirical p(n) functions for
small n values as the measured memory functions are derived from non-perfect empirical power-law p (e) distributions.
nevertheless, the analytical and empirical functions    t well asymptotically for larger n values.

[1] hansen a, mathiesen j (2006) survey of scaling surface. in modelling critical and catastrophic phenomena in geoscience,

lecture notes in physics 705:93 (springer).

[2] vajna sz, t  oth b, kert  esz j (2011) to be published.
[3] feller w (2008) an introduction to id203 theory and its applications 2nd ed. vol. 2. (wiley india pvt. ltd.).
[4] onnela jp, et al. (2007) analysis of a large-scale weighted network of one-to-one human communication. new j. phys.

9:179.

[5] karsai m, et al. (2011) small but slow world: how network topology and burstiness slow down spreading. phys. rev. e.

83:025102(r).

[6] candia j, et al. (2008) uncovering individual and collective human dynamics from mobile phone records. j. phys. a: math.

theor. 41:224015.

[7] jo hh, karsai m, kert  esz j, kaski k (2011) circadian pattern and burstiness in human communication activity.

arxiv:1101.0377.

[8] anteneodo c, malmgren rd, chialvo dr (2010) poissonian bursts in e-mail correspondence. eur. phys. j. b 75:389.
[9] smalley rf, et al. (1987) a fractal approach to the id91 of earthquakes: applications to the seismicity of the new

hebrides. bull. seism. soc. am. 77:1368.

[10] udias a, rice j (1975) statistical analysis of microearthquake activity near san andreas geophysical observatory, hollister,

california. bull. seism. soc. am. 65:809.

[11] zhao x, omi t, matsuno n, shinomoto s (2010) a non-universal aspect in the temporal occurrence of earthquakes. new.

j. phys. 12:063010.

[12] japan university network earthquake catalog file earthquake research institute (university of tokyo).

