2
1
0
2

 
p
e
s
7
1

 

 
 
]
i
s
.
s
c
[
 
 

3
v
1
6
4
2

.

2
0
2
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

how the scienti   c community reacts to newly
submitted preprints: article downloads, twitter
mentions, and citations
xin shuai1, alberto pepe2,   , johan bollen1
1 school of informatics and computing, indiana university, bloomington, in
2 center for astrophysics, harvard university, cambridge, ma
    corresponding author: apepe@cfa.harvard.edu

abstract

we analyze the online response to the preprint publication of a cohort of 4,606 scienti   c arti-
cles submitted to the preprint database arxiv.org between october 2010 and may 2011. we
study three forms of responses to these preprints: downloads on the arxiv.org site, mentions
on the social media site twitter, and early citations in the scholarly record. we perform two
analyses. first, we analyze the delay and time span of article downloads and twitter mentions
following submission, to understand the temporal con   guration of these reactions and whether
one precedes or follows the other. second, we run regression and correlation tests to investi-
gate the relationship between twitter mentions, arxiv downloads and article citations. we    nd
that twitter mentions and arxiv downloads of scholarly articles follow two distinct temporal
patterns of activity, with twitter mentions having shorter delays and narrower time spans than
arxiv downloads. we also    nd that the volume of twitter mentions is statistically correlated
with arxiv downloads and early citations just months after the publication of a preprint, with
a possible bias that favors highly mentioned articles.

1

introduction

the view from the    ivory tower    is that scholars make rational, expert decisions on what to
publish, what to read and what to cite. in fact, the use of citation statistics to assess scholarly
impact is to a large degree premised on the very notion that citation data represent an explicit,
objective expression of impact by expert authors [1]. yet, scholarship is increasingly becoming
an online process, and social media are becoming an increasingly important part of the online
scholarly ecology. as a result, the citation behavior of scholars may be a   ected by their increasing
use of social media. practices and considerations that go beyond traditional notions of scholarly
impact may thus in   uence what scholars cite.

recent e   orts have investigated the e   ect of the use of social media environments on scholarly
practice. for example, some research has looked at how scientists use the microblogging platform
twitter during conferences by analyzing tweets containing conference hashtags [2, 3]. other
research has explored the ways by which scholars use twitter and related platforms to cite
scienti   c articles [4, 5]. more recent work has shown that twitter article mentions predict
future citations [6]. this article falls within, and extends, these lines of research by examining

2

the temporal relations between quantitative measures of readership, twitter mentions, and
subsequent citations for a cohort of scienti   c preprints.

we study how the scienti   c community and the public at large respond to a cohort of
preprints that were submitted to the arxiv database (http://arxiv.org), a service managed
by cornell university library, which has become the premier pre-print publishing platform in
physics, computer science, astronomy, and related domains. we examine the relations between
three types of responses to the submissions of this cohort of pre-prints, namely the number
of twitter posts (tweets) that speci   cally mention these pre-prints, downloads of these pre-
prints from the arxiv.org web site, and the number of early citations that the 70 most twitter-
mentioned preprints in our cohort received after their submission. in each case, we measure total
volume of responses, as well as the delay and span of their temporal distribution. we perform a
comparative analysis of how these indicators are related to each other, both in magnitude and
time.

our results indicate that download and social media responses follow distinct temporal pat-
terns. moreover, we observe a statistically signi   cant correlation between social media mentions
and download and citation count. these results are highly relevant to recent investigations of
scholarly impact based on social media data [7,8] as well as to more traditional e   orts to enhance
the assessment of scholarly impact from usage data [9   12].

2 data and study overview

2.1 data collection

our analysis is based on a corpus of 4,606 scienti   c articles submitted to the preprint database
arxiv between october 4, 2010 and may 2, 2011. for each article in this cohort, we gathered
information about their downloads from the arxiv server weekly download logs, their daily
number of mentions on twitter using a large-scale collection of twitter data collected over that
period, and their early citations in the scholarly record from google scholar. table 1 summarizes
the discussed data collection and figure 1 provides an overview of the data collection timelines.

arxiv downloads
twitter mentions

early citations

n

2,904,816

5,752
431

articles
4,606
4,415

time period

october 4, 2010 to may 9, 2011
october 4, 2010 to may 9, 2011

70

october 4, 2010 to september 30, 2011

table 1. overview of data collected for a cohort of 4,606 articles submitted to the preprint
database arxiv between october 4, 2010 and may 2, 2011.

the datasets employed in this study are:
    arxiv downloads: for each article in the aforementioned cohort we retrieved their
weekly download numbers from the arxiv logs for the period from october 4, 2010 to may
9, 2011. a total of 2,904,816 downloads were recorded for 4,606 articles.

3

figure 1. timeline of data collection. our cohort consists of all papers submitted to arxiv
between october 4, 2010 and may 2, 2011. weekly article downloads and daily twitter
mentions were recorded after the article   s submission date, up to may 9, 2011. early citation
counts for each article were manually recorded from google scholar on september 30th, 2011.

    twitter mentions: our collection of tweets is based on the gardenhose, a data feed that
returns a randomly sampled 10% of all daily tweets. a twitter mention of arxiv article was
deemed to have occurred when a tweet contained an explicit or shortened link to an arxiv
paper (see    materials    appendix for more details). between october 4, 2010 and may 9,
2011 we scanned 1,959,654,862 tweets in which 4,415 articles out of 4,606 in our cohort
were mentioned at least once, i.e. approximately 95% of the cohort. such a wide coverage
of arxiv articles is mostly due to specialized bot accounts which post arxiv submissions
daily. the volume of twitter mentions of arxiv papers was very small compared to the
total volume of tweets in period, with only 5,752 tweets containing mentions of papers in
the arxiv corpus. we found that 2,800 out of 5,752 tweets are from non-bot accounts.
after    ltering out all tweets posted by bot accounts, we retain 1,710 arxiv articles out
of 4,415 that are mentioned on twitter by non-bot accounts. including or excluding bot
mentions, the distribution of number of tweets over all papers was very skewed; most
papers were mentioned only once, but one paper in the corpus was mentioned as much as
113 times.

    early citations: we manually retrieved citation counts from google scholar for the 70
most twitter-mentioned articles in our cohort. citation counts were retrieved on septem-
ber 30, 2011 and date back to the initial submission date in arxiv. all 70 articles combined
were cited a total of 431 times at that point. the most cited article in the corpus was
cited 62 times whereas most articles received hardly any citations.

by the nature of our research topic, we are particularly focused on early responses to preprint
submissions, i.e., immediate, swift reactions in the form of downloads, twitter mentions, and
citations. therefore, we record download statistics and twitter mention data only one week
over the submission period itself (up to may 9, 2011). as for citation data, we are aware that
citations take years to accrue. we do not explore here long-term citation e   ects, but only the
early, immediate response to pre-print submission in the form of citations in the scholarly record.
our citation data pertains to a time period that spans from 5 months to 1 year: it is a fraction
of the expected amount of    maturation time    for citation analysis. citation data must therefore
be considered to re   ect    early citations    only, not total potential citations.

octnovdecjanfebmaraprmayjunjulaugcohort: papers submitted to arxivsepmay 2oct 420102011data: arxiv downloadsmay 9oct 4data: twitter mentionsmay 9oct 4data: google scholar citations (limited to 70 articles)sep 30oct 44

2.2 de   nitions: delay and time span.

twitter mentions and arxiv downloads may follow particular temporal patterns. for example,
for some articles downloads and mentions may take weeks to slowly increase after submission,
whereas for other articles downloads may increase very swiftly after submission to wane very
shortly thereafter. the total number of downloads and mentions is orthogonal to these temporal
e   ects, and could be di   erent in either case.

the two parameters that we use to describe the temporal distributions of arxiv downloads
and twitter mentions are delay and the time span, which we de   ne as follows. let t0     n+ be the
date of submission for article ai. we represent both arxiv downloads and twitter mentions for
article ai as the time series t , the value of which at time t is given by the function t(ai, t)     n+.
we then de   ne the time of the    rst, maximum, and last arxiv download of article ai as t   rst(ai),
tmax(ai), and tlast(ai) respectively:

t   rst(ai) = min{t : t(ai, t) > 0}
tmax(ai) = t : max(t(ai, t)
tlast(ai) = max{t : t(ai, t) > 0}

the delay,   (ai), and span,    (ai), of the temporal distribution of arxiv downloads for article

ai will then be de   ned as:

  (ai) = tlast(ai)     t0
   (ai) = tlast(ai)     t   rst(ai)

to distinguish between the delay and span of arxiv downloads and twitter mentions, we
simply denote   ax(ai),    ax(ai),   tw(ai),    tw(ai) respectively which are de   ned according to
the above provided de   nitions.

as shown in figure 2, the delay is thus measured as the time di   erence between the date of
a preprint submission and a subsequent spike in twitter mentions (the day in which an article
receives the highest volume of related tweets) or arxiv downloads (the day in which it receives
the highest volume of downloads). the time span is the temporal    duration    of the response,
measured as the time lag between the    rst and the last twitter mention or download of the
article in question.

to illustrate delay and span, we examine in detail the response dynamics for an article in
the corpus, in figure 3. the article in question was submitted to arxiv on october 14, 2010.
time runs horizontally from left to right. downloads and twitter mentions are charted over
time (weekly for downloads, daily for mentions). as figure 3 shows, the twitter response to
submission occurs within a day, reaching a peak of nearly 40 daily mentions within several days,
and then slowly dies out over the course of the following week. the peak of arxiv downloads,
with over 16,000 weekly downloads, occurs a couple of weeks after submission, and continues
to be marked by downloads for months. from a post hoc, ergo propter hoc point of view, in
this case the twitter response occurs immediately and nearly exactly before the peak in arxiv
reads, suggesting that social media attention may have led to subsequently higher levels of arxiv
downloads.

5

figure 2. span and delay of temporal distribution of arxiv downloads or twitter mentions
over time expressed in terms of time passed between submission of article and peak and time
passed between    rst and last event, respectively.

figure 3. response dynamics (twitter mentions and arxiv downloads) for a selected arxiv
preprint. as shown, for this particular example, twitter mentions spikes shortly after
submission and publication, and wane quickly with very mentions after the initial burst.
arxiv downloads peak shortly afterwards but continue to exhibit signi   cant activity many
weeks later.

timesubmissionarxiv downloads,twitter mentionsdelayspantotaltwitter mentionsarxiv downloadsdatetwitter mentionsarxiv downloads6

3 results and discussion

in this section, we present three results: descriptive statistics of arxiv downloads and twitter
mentions, a temporal analysis of time span and delay in arxiv downloads and twitter mention,
and a regression analysis between arxiv downloads, twitter mentions, and early citations. for
the descriptive statistics, we keep all 5,752 tweets and 4,415 articles mentioned on twitter, since
we want to show a full picture of our data. for the subsequent temporal and regression analysis
we only focus on the 2,800 tweets and 1,710 arxiv articles mentioned by non-bot accounts to
avoid spurious e   ects introduced by automated bot accounts.

3.1 domain-level descriptive statistics

some descriptive statistics about the datasets analyzed in this article are presented in figure 4.
the    rst row of plots in figure 4 displays the arxiv subject domains of (a) downloaded, and
(b) twitter mentioned papers (by percentage). a full list of the subject domain abbreviations
used in these plots is available in the materials section, table 3. we observe a broad and evenly
spread distribution of subject domains for downloads and mentions: most papers downloaded
and mentioned on twitter relate to physics, in particular astrophysics, high energy physics,
and mathematics. the second row of plots in figure 4 displays the temporal distributions of
(c) downloads, and (d) twitter mentions (the dotted line in both    gures is obtained by    tting
a 3rd order polynomial function for smoothing). as shown in figure 4(c), download counts
of articles increase over time. this may be partly caused by a cumulative e   ect: papers that
were published earlier have had more time to accumulate reads than papers that were published
later. figure 4(d), however, shows that the total number of tweets that mention arxiv papers
decreases over time.

in order to better understand how twitter mentions vary across domain, we show the com-
plementary cumulative distribution functions (ccdf) of twitter mentions for all articles in
the    ve most frequently observed subjects domains of figure 5. we    nd that within each do-
main few papers receive relatively many mentions whereas the majority receive very few. the
frequency-rank distribution is thus strongly skewed towards low values indicating that most ar-
ticles receive very few twitter mentions. note that we rely on the so-called twitter gardenhose,
a random sample of about 10% of all daily tweets, and may thus underestimate the absolute
number of twitter mentions by a factor of 10. (refer to materials section for more details).

3.2 temporal analysis of delay and span

in figure 6, we plot the distributions of   ax(ai),    ax(ai),   tw(ai), and    tw(ai) following article
submission. we can see that the distributions of   ax(ai),    ax(ai),   tw(ai), and    tw(ai) are
highly skewed towards very low values, with very few cases characterized by extensive delays or
time spans. in figure 6(a), the distribution of   ax(ai) curve shows that nearly all articles take
at least 5 days to reach the peak of arxiv downloads (x <= 4 : y = 1), i.e., all articles take more
than 4 days to reach peak downloads. in addition, the distribution of    ax(ai) curve shows that
most of the articles are downloaded persistently for over 100 days (x <= 100 : y > 0.6).

7

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

figure 4.
(a) barplot of frequency of subject domains for downloaded paper (rank-ordered),
(b) barplot of frequency of subject domains for twitter-mentioned papers (rank-ordered), (c)
temporal distribution of total arxiv downloads (weekly), and (d) temporal distribution of total
twitter mentions of arxiv papers in our cohort.

from figure 6(b), it emerges that nearly 80% of the articles in the corpus reach the peak
of twitter mention just one day after they are submitted, as is shown on the distribution of
  tw(ai) curve (x = 2 : y (cid:39) 0.8). over 70% articles reach the peak of twitter mention within
5 days of submission (x = 5 : y < 0.3). however, the distribution of    tw(ai) curve shows that
over 80% of arxiv.org articles are mentioned one and one day only (x = 2 : y < 0.2), i.e., one or
multiple tweets about an article are posted within the time range of 24 hours and then are never
mentioned again. overall, compared with arxiv downloads, the twitter response to scienti   c
articles is typically swift, yet highly ephemeral, a pattern indicative of a process in which the
news of a publication is quickly passed around and very little in-depth discussion taking place
afterward.

8

figure 5. complementary cumulative distribution functions (ccdf) of twitter mentions
for all articles in the 5 most frequently observed subjects domains.

3.3 regression between article downloads, twitter mentions, and citations

we investigate the degree by which article citations, denoted c, can be explained in terms
of article-based twitter mentions, denoted t , and arxiv downloads, denoted a, by means of
a multi-variate id75 analysis. this analysis is limited to a cohort of the 70 most
mentioned articles on twitter that were submitted to arxiv.org from october 4, 2010 to march
1, 2011 (5 months). this limitation is due to the extent of work involved in manually collecting
early citation data as well as to the fact that a cohort of articles submitted earlier in the timeline
can provide a fuller coverage of twitter mentions and arxiv downloads. for each article, we
retrieve the total number of twitter mentions and arxiv downloads 60 days after submission,
and their total number of early citation counts on september 30, 2011 (7 months later after
submission of the latest paper).

given that each article could have been submitted at any time in a 5 month period, i.e.
october 4, 2010 to march 1, 2011, on september 30, 2011 some articles could have had 5 more
months than others to accumulate early citations. therefore the citation counts observed on
september 30, 2011 may be biased by the submission date of the article in question. we must
therefore include the amount of time that an article has had to accumulate citations since their
submission date as an independent variable in our regression models.

let p represent the number of days between the submission time of the article and september

30, 2011. we thus de   ne the following multivariate id75 models:

10010110210-310-210-1100p(frequency >= x)(log scale)astro-ph10010110210-310-210-1100hep10010110210-310-210-1100physics100101102frequency of twitter mentions(log scale)10-310-210-1100p(frequency >= x)(log scale)math100101102frequency of twitter mentions(log scale)10-310-210-1100cond-mat100101102frequency of twitter mentions(log scale)10-410-310-210-1100all9

(a)

(b)

figure 6. distributions of log(p (days     x)) for delay and span values in log(days) for (a)
arxiv downloads and (b) twitter mentions, recorded for all arxiv submissions in our cohort.

100101102103log(days)10-410-310-210-1100log(p(days >= x))delaytime span100101102103log(days)10-410-310-210-1100log(p(days >= x))delaytime span10

table 2. multi variant id75 analysis of article citations c vs. twitter mentions t ,
article arxiv downloads a, and time in days elapsed between beginning of our test period and
submission of article, p .

model
c =   1t +   2p +   1
c =   1a +   2p +   2
c =   1t +   2a +   3p +   3
*: p<0.1,**: p<0.05,***: p<0.01,****: p<0.001

  1 (st. error)
0.150          (0.035)
2e-04          (7e-05)
0.120          (0.040)

  2 (st. error)
0.044      (0.019)
0.038   (0.020)
1e-04(8e-05)

  3 (st. error)
-
-
0.041      (0.019)

c =   1t +   1p +   

c =   1a +   2p +   

c =   1t +   2a +   3p +   

(1)

(2)

(3)

where   i denotes the corresponding regression coe   cient.

from table 2, we observe that publication period p is certainly a non-neglectable factor
to predict the citation counts c but also that twitter mentions t shows equally signi   cant
correlations. moreover, twitter mentions seem to be the most signi   cant predictor of cita-
tions, compared to arxiv downloads and time since publication. this is not the case for arxiv
downloads which, when accounting for twitter mentions and arxiv downloads, do not exhibit
a statistically signi   cant relationship to early citations.

in figure 7 we show the bivariate scatterplots between twitter mentions, arxiv downloads
and citations. the corresponding pearson   s correlation coe   cients are shown as well. figure 7(b)
and 7(c) again show that twitter mentions are correlated with citations better than arxiv
downloads, which matches our results obtained from multivariate id75 analysis. in
addition, twitter mentions are also positively correlated with arxiv downloads as is shown
in figure 7(a), suggesting that the twitter attention received by an article can be used to
estimate its usage data, but usage, in turn, does not seem to correlated to early citations. given
the rather small sample size and the unequally distributed scatter, we performed a delete-1
observation jackknife on the pearson   s correlation coe   cient between twitter mentions and
early citations (n=70). this yields a modi   ed correlation value of 0.430 vs. the original value
of 0.4516 indicating that the observed correlation is rather robust. however, dropping the top
two frequently tweeted articles does reduce the correlation to 0.258 (p=0.016) implying that the
observed correlation is strongest when frequently mentioned articles on twitter are included,
matching the results reported by [6].

4 discussion

the ongoing move to online scholarly communication has introduced new possibilities for mea-
suring scholarly impact. at the same time, it has become more di   cult to determine which
communities drive a particular form of online impact. for example, usage data, measured as

11

(a)

(b)

(c)

figure 7. log-log scatter plots of (a) twitter mentions vs. arxiv downloads, (b) twitter
mentions vs. citations and (c) arxiv downloads vs. citations for 70 most mentioned articles on
twitter indicate statistically signi   cant correlations. marginal densities of distributions are
shown as well, indicating strongly skewed distributions of arxiv article downloads, twitter
mentions and citations.

volume of downloads, is generally assumed to re   ect the interests and preferences of the general
public, but what if the particular online service for which usage data was recorded is dedicated
to serving scientists only? what if an online service for scientists increasingly becomes a tool
for the general public to learn about scienti   c    ndings? the online user communities associ-
ated with particular services may in fact overlap to various degrees as the scholarly community
progressively moves online and the online public moves toward scholarly information services.
naturally, scholarly impact metrics should acknowledge this new reality.

the research presented in this paper is based on data from two services which are arguably
associated with and intended for two di   erent audiences. arxiv.org is focused on o   ering
scientists an online platform to publish pre-prints. twitter is designed to serve as a micro-
blogging services for the public. in this study we did, however, not attempt to conceptualize
arxiv downloads solely as scienti   c impact, and twitter mentions solely as public chatter.
rather, we measured the correlation and temporal di   erences between these forms of responses,
working under the assumption that these services naturally have overlapping and interacting
user communities.

our results, though preliminary, are highly suggestive of a strong tie between social media
interest, article downloads, and even early citations. we    nd that twitter mentions and arxiv
downloads of scholarly articles follow two distinct temporal patterns of activity, with twitter
mentions having shorter delays and narrower time spans than arxiv downloads. we also    nd
that volume of twitter mention is statistically correlated with that of both downloads and
   early    citations, i.e., citations in the scholarly record occurring less than 7 months after the
publication of a preprint.

we can think of two possible explanations for these results. first, the manner in which

101102twitter mentions (log scale)102103104105arxiv downloads (log scale)r=0.505101102024681012140123456102103104105101102twitter mentions (log scale)100101102citations (log scale)r=0.45210110202468101214024681012141618100101102r=0.38712

twitter mentions, arxiv downloads and article citations are correlated could indicate a causal
relation. scholars are increasingly exposed to social media such as twitter, and therefore their
scholarly download and citation behavior is unavoidably a   ected. a paper submitted to arxiv
that happens to receive high levels of mentions in social media will, as a result, receive greater
exposure among both the general public and scholars. as a consequence, it will receive greater
levels of scholarly interest, and higher volumes of downloads and subsequent citations. our
results indeed indicate that early twitter mentions of a paper seem to lead to more rapid
and more intense download levels and subsequently higher citation levels. second, an equally
plausible, alternative explanation for our results lies in the intrinsic quality or popular appeal
of di   erent manuscripts. a manuscript of greater quality or appeal, either among the public or
the scholarly community, will by virtue of this characteristic enjoy higher levels of mentions on
twitter, higher levels of downloads on arxiv, and higher levels of later citations. as a result
these indicators will seem to be correlated, and even causative of each other.

we therefore acknowledge that these observations can be the result of a number of distinct
or overlapping factors which our methodology confounds and fails to distinguish. consequently,
we caution against drawing the unwarranted conclusion that these results indicate that the
scholarly impact of an article can be fully determined by its social media coverage, nor that one
could increase the citation rate of an article by merely tweeting about it. the fact that some
correlation     no matter how small     was observed between social media coverage, usage, and
early citations may nevertheless indicate that the scienti   c communication process is increasingly
a   ected by the growing societal importance of social media. in future research we will therefore
continue to focus on unraveling the potential mechanisms that tie these various factors together.
these e   orts might shed light on whether and how social media is becoming a component of
academic and scholarly life.

5 materials

5.1 abbreviations

table 3 presents a list of the subject domain abbreviations used in this article.

5.2 data collection

our process of determining whether a particular arxiv article was mentioned on twitter consists
of three phases: crawling,    ltering, and organization. tweets are acquired via the streaming
api from twitter gardenhose, which represents roughly 10% of the total tweets from public
time line through random sampling. we collected tweets whose date and time stamp ranges
from 2010-10-01 to 2011-04-30 which results in a sample of 1,959,654,862 tweets.

the goal of the data    ltering process is to    nd all tweets that contain a url that directly
or indirectly links to any arxiv.org paper. however, determining whether a paper has or has
not been mentioned on twitter is fraught with a variety of issues, the most important of which
is the prevalence of partial or shortened urls. twitter imposes a 140 character limit on the
length of tweets, and users therefore employ a variety of methods to replace the original article

13

table 3. list of abbreviations for arxiv.org subject domains

subject abbr. description
astro-ph
hep
physics
math
cond-mat
cs
quant-ph
gr-qc
nucl
q-bio
math-ph
nlin
stat
q-   n

astrophysics
high energy physics
physics
mathematics
material science
computer science
quantum physics
general relative and quantum cosmology
nuclear
quantitative biology
mathematical physics
nonlinear science
statistics
quantitative finance

urls with alternative or shortened ones. since many di   erent shortened urls can point to
the same original urls, we resolve all shortened urls in our twitter data set to determine
whether any of them point to the articles in our arxiv cohort.

we distinguish between four general types of scholarly mentions in twitter, based on whether

they contain:

1. a url that directly refers to a paper published in arxiv.org.

2. a shortened url that upon expansion refers to an arxiv.org paper

3. a url that links to a web page, e.g. a blog posting, which itself contains a url that

points to an arxiv.org paper.

4. a shortened url that links to a type (3) mention after expansion.

in order to detect these four types of twitter mentions, we    rst expand all shortened urls
in our crawled public tweets. we select the top 16 popular url shortening services, including
bit.ly, tinyurl.com, and ow.ly, and expand the shortened urls in our collection of tweets using
their respective apis. as such, we resolved 98,377,880 short urls, which were mostly generated
by the following url shorteners: bit.ly (61.3%), t.co (15.2%), fb.me (6.5%), tinyurl.com (6.1%)
and ow.ly (4.4%). (we acknowledge that this procedure will not identify all twitter mentions
of a given arxiv.org paper, but it will however capture most.) from the resulting set, we retain
all tweets that contain the term    arxiv    and at least one url. next, we associate tweets to
arxiv papers by extracting the arxiv id (substrings matching    dddd.dddd   ) from any papers
mentioned in those tweets. (note that in the case of the third and fourth type of twitter mention
the arxiv paper id is not explicitly shown in the tweet itself, but needs to be extracted from
the web pages that the tweet in question links to.)

14

acknowledgments

this study was partly supported by nsf grant sbe #0914939. we would like to thank sta   
teams of the arxiv.org service at cornell university, the astrophysics data system (ads) at
the harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics, and the bit.ly team for providing download
and link data. we also thank the anonymous plos one reviewers for their invaluable feedback
which helped us to signi   cantly improve the manuscript.

references

1. rubin r (2010) foundations of library and information science. new york: neal-schuman

publishers, 3rd edition.

2. letierce j, passant a, decker s, breslin jg (2010) understanding how twitter is used to

spread scienti   c messages. in: web science conf. 2010. raleigh, nc.

3. weller k, dr  oge e, puschmann c (2011) citation analysis in twitter: approaches for
de   ning and measuring information    ows within tweets during scienti   c conferences. in:
making sense of microposts (#msm2011). pp. 1   12.

4. priem j, costello kl (2010) how and why scholars cite on twitter. in: proceedings of

the american society for information science and technology. volume 47, pp. 1   4.

5. weller k, puschmann c (2011) twitter for scienti   c communication: how can cita-

tions/references be identi   ed and measured? in: web science conf. 2011. germany.

6. eysenbach g (2011) can tweets predict citations? metrics of social impact based on
twitter and correlation with traditional metrics of scienti   c impact. journal of medical
internet research 13: e123.

7. priem j, hemminger bh (2010) scientometrics 2.0: new metrics of scholarly impact on

the social web. first monday 15.

8. priem j, piwowar ha, hemminger bh (2011) altmetrics in the wild: an exploratory
study of impact metrics based on social media. in: metrics 2011: symposium on infor-
metric and scientometric research. new orleans, la.

9. bollen j, van de sompel h, hagberg a, bettencourt l, chute r, et al. (2009) clickstream

data yields high-resolution maps of science. plos one 4.

10. bollen j, van de sompel h, rodriguez ma (2008) towards usage-based impact metrics:

   rst results from the mesur project. in: jcdl 2008. pittsburgh, pa.

11. brody t, harnad s, carr l (2006) earlier web usage statistics as predictors of later
citation impact. journal of the american society for information science and technology
57: 1060   1072.

12. kurtz m, bollen j (2010) usage bibliometrics, medford, nj: information today, inc.,

volume 44. pp. 3-64.

15

