characterizing interdisciplinarity of researchers and research topics using web 
search engines 
 
hiroki sayama1,2* and jin akaishi1,3 
1 collective dynamics of complex systems research group, binghamton university, usa 
2 departments of bioengineering & systems science and industrial engineering, binghamton 
university, usa 
3 faculty of liberal studies, kumamoto national college of technology, japan 
* corresponding author 
 
abstract 
 
researchers    networks have been subject to active modeling and analysis. earlier 
literature mostly focused on citation or co-authorship networks reconstructed from 
annotated scientific publication databases, which have several limitations. recently, 
general-purpose web search engines have also been utilized to collect information about 
social networks. here we reconstructed, using web search engines, a network 
representing the relatedness of researchers to their peers as well as to various research 
topics. relatedness between researchers and research topics was characterized by 
visibility boost   increase of a researcher   s visibility by focusing on a particular topic. it 
was observed that researchers who had high visibility boosts by the same research topic 
tended to be close to each other in their network. we calculated correlations between 
visibility boosts by research topics and researchers    interdisciplinarity at individual 
level (diversity of topics related to the researcher) and at social level (his/her centrality 
in the researchers    network). we found that visibility boosts by certain research topics 
were positively correlated with researchers    individual-level interdisciplinarity despite 
their negative correlations with the general popularity of researchers. it was also found 
that visibility boosts by network-related topics had positive correlations with 
researchers    social-level interdisciplinarity. research topics    correlations with 
researchers    individual- and social-level interdisciplinarities were found to be nearly 
independent from each other. these findings suggest that the notion of 
   interdisciplinarity    of a researcher should be understood as a multi-dimensional 
concept that should be evaluated using multiple assessment means. 
 
introduction 
 
the structural and dynamical properties of networks among researchers have been an 
important research subject for the last several decades (1-15). price originally proposed the 
key idea of preferential attachment and the resulting scale-free degree distributions for 
networks of scientific publications (1), which is now widely applied and utilized in various 
kinds of scientific fields (16-18). typical data sources for such studies on networks of 
scientific communities are domain-specific electronic paper or citation archives, such as 
arxiv.org for physics, dblp for computer science, and ssrn for social sciences, from 
which co-authorship or id191 can be created. price   s predictions have been 
confirmed in those data, such as scale-free degree distributions and the network growth over 
time based on the preferential attachment principles (4,5,8). 
 
while earlier studies mostly focused on citation or collaboration networks within a particular 
domain, there is a growing body of literature on the characterization and measurement of 
interdisciplinarity of scientific journals and researchers (19-22). these recent studies used 

cross-disciplinary citation indexing services, such as isi web of knowledge, and analyzed 
how multiple disciplines are connected by publications and researchers. interdisciplinarity 
has been characterized in several different ways, e.g., how many different disciplines were 
represented in the references cited in a single paper, how many different disciplines an 
individual researcher publishes his/her work in, and so on (19,22). 
 
however, the existing citation indexing services have several limitations. one apparent 
limitation is the lack of flexibility in their disciplinary classification. established disciplinary 
classification structures, such as those used in isi journal citation reports, are based on 
traditional notions of scientific disciplines, which may not be up-to-date for capturing 
emerging fields of cutting-edge research where the characterization of interdisciplinarity is 
most needed. also, it is commonly assumed in the citation indexing services that each journal 
belongs to just a few disciplines (mostly just one), which is not necessarily a valid 
assumption when analyzing properties of highly interdisciplinary publications. another 
limitation is that their indexing coverage may not include non-mainstream journals, 
conference proceedings, and other online archives, which are often more important in 
particular disciplines (e.g., in computer science and physics). finally, the data of the citation 
indexing services are only available on a subscription basis, which would be hard to obtain 
for researchers whose institutions do not have a subscription to those services. 
 
given those limitations of the citation indexing services mentioned above, researchers have 
recently started to utilize more general-purpose web search engines as an alternative data 
source for researchers    network reconstruction (10,14). for example, lee et al. (14) defined 
   google correlation    (i.e., number of hits obtained by a google search query for names of 
two persons) and used it to reconstruct social networks of physicists and politicians. they 
also evaluated the validity of this data collection method by showing that the reconstructed 
network by google searches was indeed correlated with the real social network (14).  
 
there are several significant advantages in this new web search engine-based method over 
the conventional methods. first, it can exploit a massive amount of information about various 
forms of association between two researchers (or any pair of keywords) that are collectively 
produced and maintained by people from all over the world. while web search-based data is 
less structured and more noisy than data collected from the online archives and citation 
indexing services, the information created through massive    collective intelligence    is often 
quite informative and useful (23,24). second, the use of general-purpose web search engines 
liberates researchers from the existing disciplinary classification structures, giving them full 
flexibility in choosing any relevant set of disciplinary keywords to study. third, many non-
indexed sources of information can be included in the analysis, such as conference 
proceedings and online archives. and finally, the data is open and accessible to everyone, 
with no subscription required. these advantages are quite suitable and beneficial for studying 
interdisciplinarity of researchers, but to our knowledge, there is no study reported yet on the 
use of such web search engines for that purpose. 
 
here we conducted a preliminary study on the interdisciplinarity of individual researchers 
and a variety of research topics using a web search engine-based data collection method. we 
searched the web for information about connections between individual researchers as well 
as researchers and research topics, each quantified by the number of hits obtained through a 
search query for two keywords (names of two researchers, or a name of a researcher and a 
research topic). one of the novelties of our work compared to earlier literature is that we 
developed a unique measurement called visibility boost, defined as an increase of a 

researcher   s visibility brought by focusing on a particular research topic. we propose this as a 
more meaningful way of quantifying the relatedness between the researcher and the research 
topic than simply using the number of web search hits for those two keywords. we also 
characterized each individual researcher   s interdisciplinarity by measuring the diversity of 
research topics related to him/her as well as his/her centrality in the researchers    network. 
the former measurement represents individual-level interdisciplinarity, i.e., how diverse the 
research topics the researcher is associated with, while the latter captures social-level 
interdisciplinarity, i.e., how important the researcher is in connecting other researchers. 
 
methods 
 
web search engine-based data collection methods require a list of keywords to be searched 
for. in our study, we created the following two separate lists. one is a list of names of 1,000 
researchers. this list was compiled by having student volunteers manually collect about 
4,000 names from four annual international conference websites for years 2006-2009, and 
then selecting the top 1,000 significant names based on their numbers of independent web 
search hits. the four selected conferences were all interdisciplinary ones the authors were 
already personally familiar with. although our prior familiarity with the conferences could be 
a source of potential biases, it was necessary in order for us to be able to manually check and 
correct mistakes in the raw data collected by student volunteers. it was also our hope that the 
interdisciplinary nature of these conferences would allow us to create a representation of 
broader research communities within limited time and labor available. 
 
the other list of keywords is a list of research topics. one could use the traditional categories 
established in scientometrics literature (e.g., isi journal citation reports categories) for this 
purpose. we did not take that option, however, because the relevant research topics discussed 
in those four subject conferences did not quite fit into the isi jcr categories, and also 
because one of our objectives was to demonstrate the flexibility in keyword selection. 
therefore, the list of research topics were collected again from the same set of websites by 
the student volunteers, and then manually edited and compiled by the authors. in so doing, 
we paid attention to maintaining a good balance among different disciplines. specifically, we 
set four major categories and made sure that the numbers of keywords were similar across 
those categories. as a result, we had 13 words for biological and medical sciences, 9 words 
for physical sciences, 9 words for engineering and robotics, and 9 words for general terms 
(40 research topics in total). because there was an overall emphasis on biological systems 
among the four conferences we used, there were slightly more words in the first category. 
the actual list of research topics can be found in appendix. 
 
in total, we compiled 1,000 (researchers    names) + 40 (research topics) = 1,040 keywords to 
use. the total number of search queries was (1,040 choose 2)     (40 choose 2) = 539,500.  the 
subtraction of    40 choose 2    was because we did not need to measure the relationships 
between research topics. we recognize that our specific choices of those researchers    names 
and research topics may have significantly influenced the results described below, which will 
be discussed in more detail later. 
 
the overview of the network to be reconstructed using these keywords is illustrated in fig. 1. 
the data about the relatedness between researchers and research topics (fig. 1, left) were 
used to characterize each researcher   s unique research areas as well as his/her individual-
level interdisciplinarity. the data about the relatedness among researchers (fig. 1, right) were 
used to characterize the researcher   s social-level interdisciplinarity. our primary goal is to 

illustrate how the proposed method works in identifying possible relationships between these 
two characterizations. 
 
we implemented a computer program in java for repeated searches using google web 
search api (25). google web search api allows one to write a program that can send a 
search query directly to google web search engines and then receive search results (with 
some limitations). earlier work also used google for social network data collection 
(10,14,26-29). in every single search query we conducted in this study, we always included 
an additional word    research    in order to narrow search results to those related to scientific 
research (although this was by no means a perfect filtering technique), following a similar 
technique used by lee et al. (14). to improve the reliability of search results, each query was 
searched three times at different times in a day, and their average values were used for 
analysis (see appendix for details). we inserted sufficient amount of waiting time between 
queries in order to avoid overloading the search engine. therefore the actual data collection 
took place rather slowly over several weeks in june and july 2010. 
 
in characterizing researchers    relatedness with particular research topics, we had to address 
the following technical problem: more common words tended to result in more search hits 
regardless of a researcher   s actual research domain. for example, the word    biology    is more 
commonly used than the word    network   , and therefore a search query    john doe    + 
   biology    +    research    can produce more search hits than    john doe    +    network    + 
   research   , even if john doe   s research domain is network science and not biology. this 
means that one cannot simply use the absolute number of search hits for characterizing 
unique research areas and interdisciplinarity of individual researchers.  
 
we solved this problem by introducing a new quantity, named visibility boost (vb), defined 
as 
 

trvb
),(

   

trh
),(
   
tih
),(
i

j

   
   

ji
,

jrh
),(
j
ih
),(

   

   
trh
),(
   
   
tih
),(
i

ji
,

j

j
ih
),(
jrh
),(

, 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 
where r is the researcher, t the research topic, and h(r, t) the number of search hits for search 
query    r    (researcher   s name) +    t    (research topic) +    research   . this formula 
mathematically describes how much change occurs to the visibility of researcher r (i.e., ratio 
between r   s own hits and the total hits over all researchers) by limiting the focus to research 
topic t (fig. 2). a visibility boost greater than (or less than) 1 means that researcher r is more 
(or less) associated with research topic t on the web. a similar link weight id172 
method was also proposed by lee et al. (14), though their method produces values that are 
influenced significantly by frequencies of two keywords searched for. in contrast, our 
visibility boost gives a more consistent, intuitive measure of association. specifically, vb = 1 
always means a neutral level of association between two keywords, while such a constant 
reference value for neutrality does not exist in lee et al.   s method. this property allows one 
to use visibility boost values comparatively for multiple different topics. 
 
results 
 
figure 3(a) shows the network of 1,000 researchers reconstructed from the data obtained 
above (which corresponds to the researchers    network illustrated on the right in fig. 1).  
nodes and undirected links represent researchers and their relatedness, respectively, where 

the average numbers of search hits were used as link weights. figure 3(b) shows a 
complementary cumulative distribution of total link weights of nodes, which does not follow 
a power-law but still shows a remarkably long tail even with this small data set. note that the 
following analysis also used a bipartite network made of connections between 1,000 
researchers and 40 research topics (illustrated on the left in fig. 1), which is not visualized 
here. 
 
to evaluate the utility of the proposed visibility boost, we counted how many unique 
researchers would be ranked within top 20%, at least once, according to their visibility boosts 
by any of the 40 research topics. we then conducted the same counting task using the raw 
search hit counts instead of visibility boosts. in addition, as a control, we also counted how 
many unique researchers would be selected, at least once, if 20% of researchers were purely 
randomly sampled 40 times. the results are summarized in fig. 4(a). based on the raw search 
hit counts (yellow), only less than 60% of the researchers had a chance to be ranked within 
top 20%. this indicates that relying on raw search hit counts would cause unwanted 
concentration of analysis on fewer researchers with greater general popularity. in contrast, 
using the visibility boosts for the same task (red) resulted in nearly every researcher having a 
chance to be ranked within top 20% for some topic, which is comparable to the random 
sampling case that showed perfect coverage (blue). this result demonstrates that the 
proposed visibility boost measure is useful in extracting information about individual 
researchers    unique specialties, without being dominated by general popularity differences 
among them. 
 
we found, both visually and statistically, that researchers who had high visibility boosts by 
the same research topic tended to aggregate in their relatedness network. figure 4(b) presents 
statistical evidence supporting this observation, in which average shortest path lengths among 
the selected 20% researchers were calculated for 40 cases and their smoothed histograms 
were plotted, under two conditions used in fig. 4(a): selection by visibility boost (red) and 
pure random selection (blue). the average shortest path lengths among the top 20% 
researchers under the former condition (red) were significantly shorter than their random 
counterparts (blue), implying that researchers strongly associated with a particular topic were 
indeed located closer to each other, possibly forming a research community on that topic. 

we calculated correlations between the visibility boosts by research topics for a researcher 
and his/her overall popularity and individual-level interdisciplinarity. the popularity was 
measured by total topic hits (tth), defined as 
 
tth

jrh
),(

r
)(

,   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

      

j

 
i.e., how many search hits the researcher r had in total across all the research topics. 
individual-level interdisciplinarity of a researcher was defined in this study as the diversity of 
research topics associated with him/her. following similar metrics used in the literature 
(21,22), we characterized the individual-level interdisciplinarity by topic hit id178 (the), 
defined as 
 
the

(3) 

log

r
)(

,   

 

 

 

 

 

 

         

j

jrh
),(
r
tth
)(

jrh
),(
r
tth
)(

 

 

which is a shannon id178 applied to the frequency distribution of search hits over all the 
topics. it is small if the researcher is strongly associated with a small number of research 
topics but not to others, or large if he/she is associated broadly with many research topics. 
 
figure 5 shows correlation coefficients between the two measurements introduced above and 
researchers    visibility boosts by various research topics. the topics are sorted from positive 
to negative correlations. it is observed in fig. 5(a) that common words tend to correlate 
positively with the overall popularity of a researcher, while technical terms tend to correlate 
negatively. this is not surprising, because popular researchers who frequently appear on 
news and other online media (i.e., those who have high total topic hits) would tend to be 
associated more with common words on the web.  the word order changes, however, when 
correlations with topic hit id178 are plotted instead (fig. 5(b)). there was no correlation 
found between figs. 5(a) and 5(b) regarding the word positions in the rankings, which means 
that each research topic has unique, independent effects on popularity and individual-level 
interdisciplinarity of a researcher. of particular interest are the research topics that moved 
significantly from a negative side in fig. 5(a) to a positive side in fig. 5(b), such as 
   evolution   ,    biology   ,    neuron   ,    cognition   ,    dynamics   ,    simulation   , and    modeling   . 
this implies that researchers who are strongly associated with these topics tend to be less 
popular overall but associated with diverse topics at an individual level. 
 
next, we investigated correlations of a researcher   s visibility boosts by research topics with 
his/her social-level interdisciplinarity, i.e., how    central    he/she is in the researchers    network. 
we considered three typical centrality measurements: degree, betweenness and closeness (30). 
some elaboration was required in measuring degree centrality because links in our network 
were weighted and the weights might be heterogeneously distributed. we used two 
approaches in measuring degrees. one was to calculate the shannon disparity of link weights 
on a node, introduced by lee et al. (14), which is given by 
 

rd
)(

   

exp

   

   

j

jrw
),(
tnh
r
)(

log

jrw
),(
r
tnh
)(

   
      
   

   
         
   

   

jrw
),(
r
tnh
)(

jrw
),(
r
tnh
)(

   

j

, 

 

 

 

(4) 

 
where w(r, j) is the number of search hits for search query    r    (researcher   s name) +    j    
(another researcher   s name) +    research   , and tnh(r) the total name hits defined as 
 
tnh

krw
),(

r
)(

.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

      

k

 
note that this shannon disparity d(r) is an exponential of a shannon id178 of the link 
weight distribution on node r, which is the effective number of links of researcher r if link 
weights were all equal. to make the terminology more intuitive, we call d(r) an effective 
degree of researcher r. 
 
the other approach we took in measuring degree centrality is to calculate total normalized 
incoming link weights of a node, defined as 
 
ri
)(

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

      

j

rjw
),(
j
tnh
)(

 

this is a sum over j of how much portion of j   s link weights comes in to r, which 
characterizes how important node r is to other nodes. 
 
for the other two centrality measures (betweenness and closeness), the reciprocals of link 
weights were used as edge distances. we used python networkx   s (31) built-in functions to 
calculate these centralities. we note that the use of betweenness as a measure of 
interdisciplinarity was already proposed by leydesdorff (20), but it was the betweenness of a 
journal in a citation network while ours is the betweenness of an individual researcher in the 
researchers    relatedness network. 
 
the results are summarized in fig. 6. we found that the rankings of the topics    complex 
network    and    social network    jumped up drastically from fig. 6(a) to figs. 6(b), 6(c) and 
(d) (and a single-word topic    network    also showed similar behavior, but in a slightly 
different way). this implies that the researchers who are strongly associated with these topics 
tend to be important to other researchers (fig. 6(b)) and occupy central positions in the 
network (figs. 6(c), 6(d)) without being associated with a broader range of other researchers 
(fig. 6(a)) or topics (fig. 5(b)). in other words, researchers who are more strongly associated 
with network-related topics may have higher social-level interdisciplinarity in their network 
without having too broad social relatedness. 
 
moreover, we also found that the correlation strengths of a research topic with researchers    
individual-level and social-level interdisciplinarities were nearly independent from each other. 
figure 7 shows the distributions of research topics in a two-dimensional correlation 
coefficient space based on the data in figs. 5(b), 6(b), 6(c) and 6(d), where research topics 
are widely scattered with no clearly identifiable tendency. this implies that the notion of 
   interdisciplinarity    should be understood as a multi-dimensional concept and should be 
evaluated using multiple assessment means, which is consistent with what has been suggested 
in the interdisciplinarity research literature (19,21,22). 
 
discussion 
 
in this paper, we illustrated our web search engine-based method to reconstruct a network of 
relatedness between individual researchers and research topics through preliminary data 
collection and analysis using a small set of keywords. our novel contributions include the 
proposal of visibility boost, a new quantity defined for a pair of a researcher and a research 
topic, which indicates how the research topic helps increase the researcher   s visibility. 
 
our results showed that visibility boosts by research topics correlated in various ways with 
other metrics. most notably, the network-related topics increased their rankings in the order 
of correlations with researchers    social-level interdisciplinarity even though they were not 
strongly correlated with the researchers    effective degrees. this finding poses an intriguing 
future research question about potential causal relationships between topics a researcher 
works on and his/her position and role in a social context. a straightforward interpretation is 
that network science is currently a hot topic and therefore network researchers may be 
referred to more often in public media and other online documents, naturally increasing their 
centrality in our data set. the opposite explanation is also plausible, though, in that 
researchers who work at the boundaries of different disciplines may tend to choose networks 
as part of their research subjects because of their generality and broad applicability to many 
domains. yet another, somewhat behavioral, explanation would also be possible, in that those 
who are aware of properties of complex networks may be able to utilize their knowledge and 

strategically optimize their positions in a social network. the data used in this study did not 
contain any causal information and therefore no conclusion can be derived at this point. more 
systematic studies on temporal changes of researchers    networks will help explain the 
underlying mechanisms responsible for the patterns observed in this study. 
 
our work also showed that the individual-level and social-level interdisciplinarities may not 
necessarily behave similarly in terms of their correlations with specific research topics. this 
fact suggests that the interdisciplinary nature of a research field should be considered as a 
multi-dimensional construct ranging over multiple levels, taking into account how many 
different concepts/disciplines are involved, how important the roles played by the researchers 
in that field are in connecting different research communities, and so on. this insight may be 
informative for those who work on formal or informal assessments of academic activities of 
researchers and research institutions. 
 
we must emphasize that our study is still preliminary and it still has several fundamental 
limitations. first and foremost, the data collection takes a lot of time in the current form of 
the proposed method. the number of keyword pairs one has to search for grows quadratically 
with the number of keywords; each pair must be searched for multiple times in order to 
improve the reliability of results; and search queries must be sent to web search engines at 
sufficient intervals in order to avoid interfering with their regular operations. this problem 
put significant constraints on the scalability of our method in this study. a closer 
collaboration with web search and other it industries will likely offer technical solutions to 
this limitation.  
 
the second limitation is the relatively low reliability of data. it is known that numbers of web 
search hits are often unreliable because of the lack of incentives for web search providers to 
give an accurate estimate of search hits (for example, see (32)). moreover, the search results 
can contain anything on the web, possibly including wrong, irrelevant, and redundant 
webpages in search hits. we used an additional keyword    research    in every search query to 
reduce such risks, but it is still far from optimal. another critical issue is the possibility of 
multiple people who share an identical name. we manually checked to make sure there were 
no such names included in our list of researchers. however, this may not be perfect because 
of inherent difficulty in identifying/distinguishing researchers only by their names without 
using metadata. in this regard, we must be cautious to note that our data and results still 
remain quite preliminary. to improve their reliability, one should integrate other data sources 
and utilize them for better filtering and analysis. semantic analysis of search results would 
also be of great help in this regard, though at the cost of computational complexity.  
 
finally, we note that our data set and results may have been influenced significantly by the 
particular choices we made when collecting primary data of researchers    names and research 
topics. we selected highly interdisciplinary conferences that were familiar to us as the source 
of information because of technical reasons described earlier, but we cannot eliminate the 
possibility of potential biases made by these choices we made. conducting much larger-scale 
data collection and analysis, starting with different sets of conferences/researchers/research 
topics, will be necessary to reduce the effects of potential biases, which is beyond the scope 
of this paper. 
 
through this work, we aimed to illustrate a novel methodology for characterizing 
interdisciplinarity of researchers and their research topics by reconstructing individual-level 
network data about relationships among them using a general-purpose web search engine. 

while our technique is still preliminary with significant room for improvement and further 
validation, we believe it has at least two major advantages. first, web search engine-based 
methods like ours make it possible for everyone to have access to a large amount of data 
through very simple interfaces with great flexibility. second, the methodology can be 
generalized from researchers    networks to virtually any kind of networks of things based on 
their conceptual or cognitive similarity, as long as nodes can be represented by keywords. we 
have published on other applications of this method elsewhere (33,34). we believe that such 
web search-based research methods will become more commonly used for scholarly research 
in the coming years. 
 
appendix 
 
to create lists of research topics and researchers    names, we had several student volunteers 
exhaustively explore the following conference websites manually and collect keywords or 
phrases related to scientific research as well as names of all researchers involved, including 
organizers, committee members, session chairs, presenters, authors/coauthors, and panelists. 
each conference website was explored by at least two independent students. these 
conferences were chosen primarily because of our own familiarity with them (which was 
necessary in order to check and manually correct the raw data coming from the student 
volunteers). 
 
mathematical biology: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

http://www.siam.org/meetings/ls06/ 
http://abacus.bates.edu/~mgreer/smb_jsmb_2007/  
http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/programs/scientific/cmm/ 

smb 2006 
smb 2007 
smb 2008 

08-09/smb/index.html  

 

 

 

 

smb 2009 

http://www.math.ubc.ca/research/mathbio/smb2009/ 

alife x (2006) 
ecal 2007 
alife xi (2008) 
ecal 2009 
 

http://www.alifex.org/ 
http://www.ecal2007.org/ 
http://alifexi.alife.org/ 
http://www.ecal2009.org/ 

 
 
artificial life: 
 
 
 
 
 
network science: 
 
 
 
 
 
bio-inspired information technology: 
 
 
 
 
 
the keywords and phrases related to scientific research collected by the students were 
manually edited and compiled by the authors into the following list of 40 research topics used 
in this study. they were sorted into four major categories and the numbers of words were 

http://www.bionetics.org/2006/ 
http://www.bionetics.org/2007/ 
http://www.bionetics.org/2008/ 
http://www.bionetics.org/2009/ 

http://vw.indiana.edu/netsci06/ 
http://www.nd.edu/~netsci/ 
http://www.ifr.ac.uk/netsci08/ 
http://www.netsci09.net/ 

bionetics 2006 
bionetics 2007 
bionetics 2008 
bionetics 2009 
 

netsci 2006 
netsci 2007 
netsci 2008 
netsci 2009 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

made similar across those categories in order to maintain a good balance among different 
disciplines. 
 
[biological and medical sciences, 13 words] 
biology 
cancer 
cell 
disease 
ecology 
ecosystem 
evolution 
gene 
immunology 
molecule 
neuron 
physiology 
protein 
 
[physical sciences, 9 words] 
chemistry 
complex network 
complex system 
dynamics 
emergence 
mathematics 
modeling 
physics 
simulation 
 
[engineering and robotics, 9 words] 
algorithm 
application 
cognition 
computer 
control 
engineering 
motor 
robot 
software 
 
[general terms, 9 words] 
communication 
economy 
information 
intelligence 
network 
science 
signal 
social network 
system 

 
in collecting researchers    names, the student volunteers were instructed to omit middle 
initials and replace any letters with diacritics (e.g., accents, umlauts, etc.) by normal alphabet 
letters without diacritics. these rules were implemented so as to make data inspection and 
correction easier. the collected lists of researchers    names were then aggregated into a single 
text file and carefully examined by the authors to correct any recognizable mistakes 
(misspellings, duplications, etc.). as a result, we had over 4,050 names collected in total. 
 
to conduct systematic web searches using google, we wrote a simple program code in java 
that sequentially searches for each pair of keywords stored in a plain text file and then 
extracts and records their relatedness (i.e., number of search hits) from the search result. the 
code was developed using with google web search api just for internal use for this study 
and not for public release, but it is available from the authors upon request. 
 
the original list of researchers    names was too long for our data collection (i.e., the number 
of pairs, 4,050 choose 2, was beyond eight million), so we first conducted systematic web 
searches for each researcher   s name only (together with the filtering word    research   ). then 
we sorted the results in terms of search hits and selected the top 1,000 researchers for the 
main data collection and analysis. 
 
for the main data collection, each search query (in which    research    was always included) 
was searched three times at different times in a day in order to improve the reliability of 
search results. a known problem in using google search results is that it sometimes returns 
an orders of magnitude larger (or smaller) number as search hits, which would strongly 
influence if the results were averaged as is. to avoid such errors, we discarded either the 
largest or smallest result, whichever was farther away from the median result, before 
calculating a mean. if both were equally distant from the median, none of them was discarded, 
i.e., the mean became the median. 
 
we used programming language python and its networkx module (31) for network 
visualization and analysis, and also wolfram research   s mathematica for statistical analysis. 
codes for these analyses were also developed for internal use only, but can be shared upon 
request. 
 
references 
 
1.  de solla price, d. j. networks of scientific papers. science 149, 510-515 (1965). 
2.  friedkin, n. e. university social structure and social networks among scientists. amer. j. 

sociol. 83, 1444-1465 (1978). 

3.  braam, r. r., moed, h. f. & van raan, a. f. j. mapping of science by combined 

cocitation and word analysis i. structural aspects. j. amer. soc. info. sci. 42, 233-251 
(1991). 

4.  newman, m. e. j. the structure of scientific collaboration networks. pnas 98, 404-409 

5.  newman, m. e. j. id91 and preferential attachment in growing networks. phys. rev. 

(2001). 

e 64, 025102 (2001). 

6.  eaton, j. p., ward, j. c., kumar, a. & reingen, p. h. structural analysis of co-author 

relationships and author productivity in selected outlets for consumer behavior research. j. 
consumer psych. 8, 39-59 (1999). 

7.  shiffrin, r. m. & b  rner, k., eds. special issue on mapping knowledge domains. pnas 

8.  newman, m. e. j. coauthorship networks and patterns of scientific collaboration. pnas 

101 (suppl 1) (2004). 

101 (suppl 1), 5200-5205 (2004). 

9.  b  rner, k., maru, j. t. & goldstone, r. l. the simultaneous evolution of author and 

paper networks. pnas 101 (suppl 1), 5266-5273 (2004). 

10. asada, y., matsuo, y. & ishizuka, m. increasing scalability of researcher network 

extraction from the web. trans. japan. soc. artif. intell. 20, 370-378 (2005). 

11.   str  m, f. changes in the lis research front: time-sliced cocitation analyses of lis 

journal articles, 1990-2004. j. amer. soc. info. sci. tech. 58, 947-957 (2007). 

12. janssens, f., gl  nzel, w. & de moor, b. a hybrid mapping of information science. 

scientometrics 75, 607-631 (2008). 

13. liu, x., yu, s., janssens, f., gl  nzel, w., moreau, y. & de moor, b. weighted hybrid 

id91 by combining id111 and bibliometrics on a large-scale journal database. j. 
amer. soc. info. sci. tech. 61, 1105-1119 (2010). 

14. lee, s. h., kim, p.-j., ahn, y.-y. & jeong, h. googling social interactions: web search 

engine based social network construction. plos one e11233 (2010). 

15. klavans, r. & boyack, k. w. using global mapping to create more accurate document-

level maps of research fields. j. amer. soc. info. sci. tech. 62, 1-18 (2011). 

16. barab  si, a.-l. & albert, r. emergence of scaling in random networks. science 286, 

509-512 (1999). 

17. barab  si, a.-l. linked (plume, 2003). 
18. newman, m., barab  si, a.-l. & watts, d. j., eds. the structure and dynamics of 

networks (princeton university press, 2006). 

19. porter, a. l., cohen, a. s., roessner, j. d. & perreault, m. measuring researcher 

interdisciplinarity. scientometrics 72, 117-147 (2007). 

20. leydesdorff, l. betweenness centrality as an indicator of the interdisciplinarity of 

scientific journals. j. amer. soc. info. sci. tech. 58, 1303-1319 (2007). 
21. rafols, i. & meyer, m. diversity and network coherence as indicators of 

interdisciplinarity: case studies in bionanoscience. scientometrics 82, 263-287 (2010). 

22. wagner, c. s., roessner, j. d., bobb, k., klein, j. t., boyack, k. w., keyton, j., rafols, 
i. & b  rner, k. approaches to understanding and measuring interdisciplinarity scientific 
research (idr): a review of the literature. j. informetrics 5, 14   26 (2011). 

23. levy, p. collective intelligence: mankind   s emerging world in cyberspace (helix books, 

1997). 

24. malone, t. w., laubacher, r. & dellarocas, c. harnessing crowds: mapping the genome 

of collective intelligence. mit sloan research paper no. 4732-09 (2009). 

25. google, inc. google web search api website. 

http://code.google.com/apis/websearch/docs/. accessed on 11/4/2011 (now deprecated 
and replaced by google apis console). 

26. kautz, h., selman, b. & shah, m. the hidden web. ai magazine 18(2), 27 (1997). 
27. mika, p. id64 the foaf-web: an experiment in social network mining. proc. 
1st workshop on friend of a friend, social networking and the semantic web (2004). 
available at http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/europe/events/foaf-
galway/papers/fp/id64_the_foaf_web/. 

28. mori, j., matsuo, y., ishizuka, m. & faltings, b. keyword extraction from the web for 
person metadata annotation. iswc workshop notes viii (w8) - 4th int   l. workshop on 
knowledge markup and semantic annotation, pp.51-60 (2004). 

29. matsuo, y., mori, j., hamasaki, m., nishimura, t., takeda, h., hasida, k. & ishizuka, m. 

polyphonet: an advanced social network extraction system from the web. web 
semantics 5, 262-278 (2007). 

30. wasserman, s. & faust, k. social network analysis: methods and applications 

(cambridge university press, 1994). 

31. hagberg, a. a., schult, d. a. & swart, p. j. exploring network structure, dynamics, and 

function using networkx. proc. 7th python in science conference, pp. 11-15 (2008). 
also see the networkx website http://networkx.lanl.gov/. 

32. sullivan, d. why google can   t count results properly. a blog post on 

searchengineland.com. october 21, 2010. http://searchengineland.com/why-google-
cant-count-results-properly-53559 accessed on december 13, 2011. 

33. akaishi, j., sayama, h., dionne, s.d., chen, x., gupta, a., hao, c., serban, a., bush, b. 

j., head, h. j. & yammarino, f. j. reconstructing history of social network evolution 
using web search engines. proc. bionetics 2010, #10617 (2010). 

34. dionne, s. d, akaishi, j., chen, x., gupta, a., sayama, h., yammarino, f. j., serban, a., 
hao, c., head, h. j. & bush, b. j.retrospective relatedness reconstruction: applications 
to adaptive social networks and social sentiment. organizational research methods, in 
press. 

 
acknowledgments 
 
the authors thank the following student volunteers in the department of bioengineering at 
binghamton university who helped the data collection task: shawn augustine, tasha 
casagni, tomasz falkowski, joseph perez-rogers, mark schede, josh smiedy, elizabeth 
thompson, han wang, aristo wong, and wendy yung. the authors also thank google for 
the data and their web search api which made this study possible.  
 
author contributions statement 
 
hs and ja collaboratively designed the research. ja developed the data collection software. 
hs and ja conducted data collection and preprocessing. hs conducted detailed data analysis 
and wrote the manuscript text and prepared all the figures except for fig. 3(a), which was 
prepared by ja. both authors reviewed the manuscript. 

figures and figure legends 
 

 
figure 1: an overview of the network that consists of 1,000 researchers and 40 research 
topics reconstructed in this study. each link is weighted by the average number of web search 
hits for a search query of (research topic) + (researcher   s name) +    research    (left), or 
(researcher   s name 1) + (researcher   s name 2) +    research    (right). 

 

 
figure 2: an example of    visibility boost    calculation. this figure shows how to calculate 
the visibility boost by research topic    network    for the researcher a in the middle (blue). 

 

 (a) 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

        (b) 
 

 
figure 3: (a) reconstructed network of 1,000 researchers. (b) distribution of total link 
weights of nodes, plotted as a complementary cumulative distribution function (ccdf). 

    

 

 

  (a) 
 

 

 

 

 

          (b) 

   

 

 
figure 4: (a) comparison of the numbers of nodes (researchers) that appeared at least once 
in 40 times of selection trials. yellow: top 20% nodes selected based on their original search 
hit counts for each of the 40 research topics. red: top 20% nodes selected based on their 
visibility boosts by each of the 40 research topics. blue: random selection of 20% nodes 
repeated 40 times. (b) smoothed histograms of average shortest path lengths among the 
selected 20% nodes in the researchers    network (n = 40 for each histogram; each sample 
point corresponds to one measurement of average shortest path length among the selected 
20% nodes). to calculate path lengths, the reciprocals of link weights were used as edge 
distances. the average shortest path lengths among the top 20% nodes selected based on 
their visibility boosts were significantly smaller than random counterparts (p < 0.05 by 
standard t-test), showing that researchers who share high visibility boosts by the same topic 
tended to come closer to each other in the network. 

      (a)   

 

 

 

 

       (b) 

 

 

figure 5: correlations between the visibility boost of each research topic and a researcher   s 
overall popularity (total topic his, (a)) and individual-level interdisciplinarity (topic hit 
id178, (b)). upward or downward moves of topics from (a) to (b) by 20 or more places in 
the ranking are indicated by solid and dashed arrows, respectively. 

 (a) 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) 

 

(c) 

 

 

 

 

     

 

(d) 

 

 
figure 6: correlation between each research topic and a researcher   s social-level 
interdisciplinarity. (a) effective degree. (b) total normalized incoming link weights. (c) 
betweenness centrality. (d) closeness centrality. network-related topics are highlighted. 

     

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
figure 7: two dimensional maps summarizing each research topic   s correlations with a researcher   s individual-level interdisciplinarity 
(vertical, topic hit id178) and social-level interdisciplinarity (horizontal, three centrality measurements). 
 
 

 

