2
1
0
2

 

b
e
f
1

 

 
 
]

m

i
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

2
v
6
7
4
5

.

1
0
2
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

the relative signi   cance of the h-index

h.c. spruit

max-planck-institut f  ur astrophysik,

karl-schwarzschild-str. 1,
85748 garching, germany

abstract

use of the hirsch-index (h) as measure of an author   s visibility in the
scienti   c literature has become popular as an alternative to a gross mea-
   
sure like total citations (c). i show that, at least in astrophysics, h corre-
lates tightly with overall citations. the mean relation is h = 0.5(
c + 1).
outliers are few and not too far from the mean, especially if    normalized   
ads citations are used for c and h. whatever the theoretical reason-
ing behind it, the hirsch index in practice does not appear to measure
something signi   cantly new.

citation metrics

the hirsch index, a quantitative measure of an authors    status in
the scienti   c literature, is de   ned as the paper number n in his list of
publications (ranked by citations, highest    rst) where n equals the number
of citations. (in nasa   s ads, click on    sort by normalized citations    and
scroll the results down to the last paper of which the rank is less or
equal to the number of citations listed for it). it appears to have become
fashionable as a more meaningful metric than, or as an alternative to,
the simple metric of raw citation rates. it has been implemented also for
quantifying the scienti   c impact of observing facilities (grothkopf et al.
2007).

the invention of new    gures of merit using citation rates implies an
attempt to    nd optimal metrics for an intuitive notion of quality (   a bet-
ter than b   ). re   ection on the way in which these statistics are handled
in practice, however, shows that focus on the accuracy or biases of dif-
ferent metrics in abstracto is somewhat misguided. the uncertainty in
applying such metrics is related more to the purpose they are to be used
for. unreliable work, for example, can have a high citation rate but this
will be discounted accordingly if reliability is more important, depending
on the purpose of an evaluation. high visibility in the popular media, on
the other hand, can trump reliability, teaching skills can trump citation
rates, etc. the substitution of gross citations by a new index like h as an
abstract measure of    quality    or impact tends to obscure this more basic
issue.

for the average astrophysical career, h scales roughly linearly with the
author   s career age (time since phd). like total citations, it can therefore
not be used for comparison between authors unless compensation is made
for di   erences in career age. the total number of all citations in the ref-
erence lists of the papers published in the main journals has increased at
a fairly constant rate of 5% per year since the 1960   s. the starting date

1

of one   s career thus also makes a signi   cant di   erence: younger scientists
should be expected to collect citations faster than their older colleagues
did at the same stage in their career.
[similarly: the yearly increase in
your citation rate has to be discounted somewhat due to this increase,
if citations are to be interpreted as your relative impact in the commu-
nity]. the use of citation numbers, even if understood as measuring a
more neutral descriptive like visibility rather than quality, is therefore not
meaningful unless such factors are taken into account.

figure 1: correlation between hirsch-index (h) and citations (c) using ads
normalized citations (left) and ads non-normalized citations (right).

h-index vs. total citations

figure 1 shows h-indices for a sample of astrophysicists, using citation
numbers from ads1. two di   erent versions are shown, the h-index ht
using total citations ct, and the index hn based on ads    normalized   
citations cn. the latter weighs the citations by the number of co-authors
on the paper cited. this is appropriate if the thing to be measured is not
the impact of a paper but of an individual author, and makes it possible to
compare authors working in collaborations of di   erent size. the sample
(113 points) has been compiled through a non-random selection process.
most points represent names that occurred to me while scanning the daily
arxiv astro-ph abstracts. on average, these score higher than the mean.
to get better statistics at the low end, i added a number of authors
suspected to score lower on the basis of personal acquaintance, plus a
number of junior authors of papers with better known senior coauthors.
the distribution of points along the curve is thus not representative. a
good    t to the data is

   
h = 0.5(

c + 1).

(1)

(the 1 in the bracket has been added so the curve also    ts the hypothetical
author with just 1 citation). the square-root dependence was noted by
hirsch (2005), the equivalence of the h-index with total citations was
emphasized already by nielsen (2008), both for samples of physicists (see
also petersen et al. 2011). the scatter around this curve is 11% rms

1these are more reliable than numbers from commercial products since they take into

account more information speci   c to the    eld of astrophysics.

2

for normalized citations and 18% for non-normalized citations. scatter
at this level is likely to be well within the uncertainties associated with
any relevant evaluation process. the increased scatter when using non-
normalized citations is due to authors publishing in large collaborations
(points to the right of the bulk).

debates about the virtues of the h-index2 have centered on theoretical
arguments about possible biases intrinsic to di   erent metrics (e.g. hirsch
2005, redner 2010, waltman & van eck 2011, waaijers 2011). in practice,
the hirsch index does not appear to measure anything signi   cantly di   er-
ent from overall citations, however, at least not for the present sample of
astrophysicists (nor for physics in general, nielsen 2008).

references

grothkopf, u., melo, c., erdmann, c., kaufer, a., & leibundgut, b.

2007, the messenger, 128, 62 (2007msngr.128...62g)

hirsch j. e. 2005, proc. nat. acad. sci. 102, 16569 (arxiv:physics/0508025)
nielsen, m., 2008,

http://michaelnielsen.org/blog/why-the-h-index-is-virtually-no-use/

petersen, a.m., stanley, h.e., & succi, s., 2011, scienti   c reports, 1,

a181. doi:10.1038/srep00181

redner, s., 2010, j. stat. mech. l03005 (arxiv:1002.0878v1

[physics.data-an])

waaijers, l. ,2011, arxiv:1109.5520v1 [physics.soc-ph]
waltman, l., van eck, n.j., 2011, arxiv:1108.3901v1 [cs.dl]

2the main reason for the popularity of the h-index is probably the organization of the
isi citation index that is used for most countings. adding up the total citations (via the isi
web interface wos) is laborious (isi can provide such numbers at an additional charge). an
h-index is found much more easily.

3

