2
1
0
2

 

y
a
m
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

2
v
3
4
6
3

.

2
0
2
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

dynamics of con   icts in wikipedia
taha yasseri1   , robert sumi1, andr  as rung1, andr  as kornai1,2, j  anos kert  esz1

1 department of theoretical physics, budapest university of technology and economics,

budapest, hungary.

2 computer and automation research institute, hungarian academy of sciences,

1

budapest, hungary.
    e-mail: yasseri@phy.bme.hu

abstract

in this work we study the dynamical features of editorial wars in wikipedia (wp). based on our previously

established algorithm, we build up samples of controversial and peaceful articles and analyze the temporal

characteristics of the activity in these samples. on short time scales, we show that there is a clear

correspondence between con   ict and burstiness of activity patterns, and that memory e   ects play an

important role in controversies. on long time scales, we identify three distinct developmental patterns

for the overall behavior of the articles. we are able to distinguish cases eventually leading to consensus

from those cases where a compromise is far from achievable. finally, we analyze discussion networks and

conclude that edit wars are mainly fought by few editors only.

introduction

new media such as the internet and the web enable entirely new ways of collaboration, opening unprece-

dented opportunities for handling tasks of extraordinary size and complexity. such collaborative schemes

have already been used to solve challenges in software engineering [1] and mathematics [2]. understanding

the laws of internet-based collaborative value production is of great importance.

perhaps the most prominent example of such value production is wikipedia (wp), a free, collab-

orative, multilingual internet encyclopedia [3]. wp evolves without the supervision of a pre-selected

expert team, its voluntary editors de   ne the rules and maintain the quality. wp has grown beyond

other encyclopedias both in size and in use, having unquestionably become the number one reference

in practice. although criticism has been continuously expressed concerning its reliability and accuracy,

2

partly because the editorial policy is in favor of consensus over credentials [4], independent studies have

shown that, as early as in 2005, science articles in wp and encyclopedia britannica were of compara-

ble quality [5]. as every edit and discussion post is saved and available, wp is particularly well suited

to study internet-based collaborative processes. indeed, wp has been studied extensively from di   er-

ent aspects including the growth of content and community [6, 7], coverage [8, 9] and evolution of the

hyperlink networks [10   14], the extraction of semantic networks [15   17], linguistic studies [18   20], user

reputation [21] and collaboration quality [22, 23], vandalism detection [24   26], and the social aspects of

the editor community [27   32].

usually, di   erent editors constructively extend each other   s text, correct minor errors and mistakes

until a consensual article emerges     this is the most natural, and by far the most common, way for a

wp entry to be developed [33]. good examples include (wp articles will be cited in typewriter font

throughout the text) benjamin franklin, pumpkin or helium. as we shall see, in the english wp close

to 99% of the articles result from this rather smooth, constructive process. however, the development of

wp articles is not always peaceful and collaborative, there are sometimes heavy    ghts called edit wars

between groups representing opposing opinions. schneider et al. [34] estimated that in the english wp,

among the highly edited or highly viewed articles (these notions are strongly correlated, see [35]), about

12% of discussions are devoted to reverts and vandalism, suggesting that the wp development process for

articles of major interest is highly contentious. the wp community has created a full system of measures

to resolve con   ict situations, including the so called    three revert rule    (see wikipedia:edit warring),

locking articles for non-registered editors, tagging controversial articles, and temporal or    nal banning

of malevolent editors. it is against this rich backdrop of explicit rules, explicit or implicit regulations,

and unwritten conventions that the present paper undertakes to investigate a fundamental part of the

collaborative value production, how con   icts emerge and get resolved.

the    rst order of business is to construct an automated procedure to identify controversial articles.

for a human reader the simplest way to do so is to go to the discussion (talk) pages of the articles, which

often show the typical signatures of con   icts as known from social psychology [36]. the length of the

discussion page could already be considered a good indicator of con   ict: the more severe the con   ict, the

longer the talk page is expected to be (this will be shown in detail later). however, this feature is very

language dependent: while con   icts are indeed fought out in detail on discussion pages in the english

wp, german editors do not use this vehicle for the same purpose. moreover, there are wps, e.g. the

3

hungarian one, where discussion pages are always rather sparse, rarely mentioning the actual arguments.

clearly the discussion page alone is not an appropriate source to identify con   icts if we aim at a general,

multi-lingual, culture-independent indicator.

con   icts in wp were studied previously both on the article and on the user level. kittur et al. [37,38]

and vuong et al. [39] measured controversiality by counting the    controversial    tag in the history of an

article, and compared other possible metrics to that. it should be noted, however, that this is at best a

one-sided measure as highly disputed pages such as gdansk or euthanasia in the english wp lack such

tags, and the situation is even worse in other wps. in [38], di   erent page metrics like the number of

reverts, the number of revisions etc. were compared to the tag counts and in [39] the number of deleted

words between users were counted and a    mutual reinforcement principle    [40] was used to measure

how controversial a given article is. clearly, there are several features of an article which correlate with

its controversiality, making it highly non-trivial to choose an appropriate indicator. some papers try to

detect the negative    con   ict    links between wp editors in a given article and, based on this, attempt to

classify editors into groups. the main idea of the method used by kittur et al. [38] is to relate the severity

of the con   ict between two editors to the number of reverts they carry out on each other   s versions. in a

more recent study [41, 42], brandes et al. counted the number of deleted words between editors and used

this as a measure of controversy.

there is no question that reverting a part of an article expresses strong disagreement, but sometimes

this is just related to eliminating vandalized texts, while in other cases it is related to con   ict about

the contents of the article. here we are interested in the second case and it will be one of our goals to

distinguish between deeper con   ict and mere vandalism. beyond identifying con   ict pages and edit wars,

we aim at relating di   erent properties of the articles to their level of controversiality. in the methods

section we describe the dataset, summarize our con   ict identi   cation method, and relate it to other

measures proposed in the literature. in the main body of the paper we analyze the temporal evolution

of con   icts both on the micro and the macro timescales and, based on that, we try to categorize them.

methods

to analyze edit wars in wp    rst we need to be able to detect the articles where signi   cant debates occur.

for the human viewer of page histories it is evident that an article such as liancourt rocks, discussing a

4

group of small islets claimed by both korea and japan, or the article on homosexuality were the subject

of major edit wars. yet articles with a similar number or relative proportion of edits such as benjamin

franklin or pumpkin were, equally evidently to the human reader, developed peacefully. for our con   ict

detection method (previously reported in [43], [44]), similar to most pattern recognition tasks such as

speech or character recognition, we take human judgment to be the gold standard or    truth    against

which machine performance is to be judged. how human judgment is solicited is discussed in text s1.

the whole structured dataset and the implementation of the ranking algorithm described below, along

with the raw results, are available at wikiwarmonitor webpage: http://wwm.phy.bme.hu/.

dataset

our analysis is based on the january 2010 dump of the english wp [45], which contains all the versions

of all pages up to that date. the dataset originally contains 3.2 m articles, but we have    ltered out all

short (less than 1,000 characters) and evidently con   ict-free (less than 100 edits) articles, leaving a    nal

set of around 223 k articles.

detecting edit wars

our detection method is entirely based on statistical features of edits and is therefore independent of

language characteristics. this makes possible both inter-cultural comparisons and cross-language checks

and validation.

revert maps

to detect reverts we calculated the md5 [46] hash for each revision, and reverts were identi   ed by
comparing the hash of di   erent revisions. let . . . , i     1, i, i + 1, . . . , j     1, j, j + 1, . . . be stages in the
history of an article. if the text of revision j coincides with the text of revision i     1, we considered

this a revert between the editor of revision j and i respectively. let us denote by ni the total number

of edits in the given article of that user who edited the revision i. we characterize reverts by pairs

(n d

i , n r

j ), where r denotes the editor who makes the revert, and d refers to the reverted editor (self-

reverts are excluded). figure 1 represents the revert map of the non-controversial benjamin franklin

and the highly controversial israel and the apartheid analogy articles. each mark corresponds to

one or more reverts. the revert maps already distinguish disputed and non-disputed articles, and we

5

can improve the results by considering only those cases where two editors revert each other mutually,

hereafter called mutual reverts. this causes little change in disputed articles (compare the right panels

of figure 1 but has great impact on non-disputed articles (compare left panels).

controversy measure

based on the rank (total edit number within an article) of editors, two main revert types can be dis-

tinguished: when one or both of the editors have few edits to their credit (these are typically reverts

of vandalism since vandals do not get a chance to achieve a large edit number, as they get banned by

experienced users) and when both editors are experienced (created many edits). in order to express this

distinction numerically, we use the lesser of the coordinates n d and n r, so that the total count includes

vandalism-related reverts as well, but with a much smaller weight. thus we de   ne our raw measure of

controversiality as

(cid:88)

(n d

i ,n r
j )

mr =

min(n d

i , n r
j )

(1)

once we developed our    rst auto-detection algorithm based on mr, we iteratively re   ned the con-

troversial and the noncontroversial seeds on multiple languages by manually checking pages scoring very

high or very low. in this process, we improved mr in two ways:    rst, by multiplying with the number of
editors e who ever reverted mutually (the larger the armies, the larger the war) and de   ne mi = e    mr
and second, by censuring the topmost mutually reverting editors (eliminating cases with con   icts between

two persons only). our    nal measure of controversiality m is thus de   ned by

m = e    (cid:88)

min(n d

i , n r

j ).

(2)

(n d

i ,n r

j )<max

evaluation and accuracy

one conceptually easy (but in practice very labor-intensive) way to validate m is by simply taking samples

at di   erent m values and counting how many controversial pages are found (see figure 2), considering

human judgment as the    truth   . we have checked this measure for six di   erent languages and concluded

that its overall performance is superior to other measures [44].

6

results and discussion

having validated the m -based selection process, we can start analyzing the controversial and peaceful

articles from a variety of perspectives. we calculated m for all the articles in the sample     a histogram is

shown in figure 3. the primary observation here is that the overall population of controversial articles is

very small compared to the large number of total articles. out of our sample of 233 k articles, there are

some 84 k articles with nonzero m , and only about 12 k with m > 103. the number of super-controversial

articles with m > 106 is less than 100.

we mention in passing that the topical distribution of the controversial issues di   ers signi   cantly

spatially (across di   erent language editions of wp): for example, soccer-related issues are massively

controversial in the spanish wp but not elsewhere. there are    ashpoints common to all languages

and cultures, in particular religious and political topics, but we leave the detailed cross-cultural analysis

for another occasion [47]. here we focus on the temporal aspects of con   ict (based, unless speci   cally

mentioned otherwise, on the english wp),    rst at the micro-dynamic level (hours, days, and weeks),

and next on a macro timescale (the lifetime of the article, typically measured in years) to see the overall

patterns of con   icts.

micro-dynamics of con   icts

once we have a reliable measure of controversiality, not only can we    nd and rank controversial issues in

wps, but we actually begin to see important phenomena and common characteristics of wars and disputes.

here we report our    ndings on the temporal characteristics of edits on high and low controversiality pages.

we make use of the fact that in the wp dump a timestamp with one second precision is assigned to each

edit. one month of activity (the time-line of all edits irrespective of who performed them) on two sample

articles are depicted in figure 4.

west et. al. [48] and adler et. al. [26] have developed vandalism detection methods based on temporal

patterns of edits. in both studies the main assumption is that o   ensive edits are reverted much faster

than normal edits, and therefore, by considering the time interval between an arbitrary edit and its

subsequent reverts, one can classify vandalized versions with high precision.

7

edit frequency

most of the articles are frequently edited. figure 5 shows the empirical id203 density function of

the average time    between two successive edits. as already noted in [35] edit frequency also depends

on the controversiality of a page, and one expects higher edit frequency for more controversial pages.
however, as figure 6 makes clear, the correlation is quite weak (correlation coe   cient c =    0.03).

burstiness

it is clear that edits are clustered in a way that there are many edits done in a rather short period,

followed by a rather long period of silence. this feature is known in the literature as burstiness [49, 50],

and is quanti   ed based on the coe   cient of variation by a simple formula as

b              m  

     + m  

(3)

where m   and      denote respectively the mean and standard deviation of the interval    between successive

edits. we have calculated b for all the articles in the sample, considering all the edits made on them

by any user. as it can be seen from figure 7, overall burstiness of edits correlates rather weakly with

controversiality (c = 0.05).

to see the impact of controversiality on burstiness we calculated b for di   erent groups of articles

separately: disputed articles (m > 1000), listed articles coming from the list of controversial

articles in wp [51], randomly selected articles, and featured articles (assumed to be least controversial

given wps stringent selection criteria for featuring an article). the histograms in figure 8(a) show the

pdf of b in these four classes. as can be seen, the peaks are shifted to the right (higher b) for

more controversial articles, but not strongly enough to base the detection of controversy on burstiness of

editorial activity alone. reverting is a useful tool to restore vandalized articles, but it is also a popular

weapon in heated debates. figure 8(b) shows the distribution of b calculated not for all edits, but for

reverts alone: the shift is now more marked. finally, we considered an even stronger form of warfare:

mutual reverts. it is evident that the temporal pattern of mutual reverts provides a better characterization

of controversiality than that of all edits or all reverts, and the very visible shift observed in figure 8(c)

constitutes another, albeit less direct, justi   cation of our decision to make mutual reverts the central

element in our measure of controversiality.

8

to gain a better understanding of the microdynamics of edit wars, we selected two samples of 20
articles each, extracted from a pool of articles with average successive edit time intervals of 10 hours   5%.
one sample contains the most controversial articles in the pool with 104 < m < 7    104, whereas the

other one contains the most peaceful articles with 100 < m < 150. the id203 distribution of time

   between edits for these samples is shown in figure 9. both samples have a rather fat-tailed distribution

with a shoulder in the distribution (as observed both in the empirical data and the model calculation),
indicating that a characteristic time,        105 seconds (one day), is present in the system. however, only
the sample consisting of controversial articles displays a clear power-law distribution, p (   )            ,with

   = 0.97. all exponents were calculated by applying the gnuplot implementation [52] of the nonlinear

least-squares marquardt-levenberg algorithm [53] on the log-binned data with an upper cut-o    to avoid

system size e   ects.

to    t the data depicted in figure 9, we used a model based on a queuing mechanism introduced

in [50] and further developed in [54]. here we brie   y explain its basis and how we use it to model our

empirical    ndings. let us assume that there is a list of l articles and there is only one editor (mean-   eld
approximation) who edits at each step once. with id203 1    p , the editor selects the article to edit

from the list randomly and with no preference among l choices. with id203 p the articles will be
selected according to a priority xi     (0, 1) which is assigned randomly to the ith article after each edit
on it. the key parameters are l, p and the real time tp associated to the model time step. controversial

articles are    tted well by p close to 1 and small l. uncontroversial articles    t with large l and smaller

p , in nice agreement with the real situation, where editors tend to edit a few controversial articles more

intentionally and many peaceful articles in a more or less uncorrelated manner with no bias and memory.

to check the validity of the model, we calculated the ratio of the number of controversial articles (with
m > 1000) to the rest of the articles (m < 1000) to be     0.052, which is in nice agreement with the

   tting model parameters, 20/500=0.04.

another important characteristic quantity is the autocorrelation function a(t ). to calculate it,    rst

we produce a binary series of 0/1 x(t) similar to the one in figure 4. then a(t ) is computed simply as

a(t ) =

(cid:104)x(t)x(t + t )(cid:105)t     (cid:104)x(t)(cid:105)2

t

(cid:104)x(t)(cid:105)t     (cid:104)x(t)(cid:105)2

t

(4)

where (cid:104).(cid:105)t stands for the time average over the whole series. a(t ) for the same samples of controversial and

9

peaceful articles are shown in figure 10. we calculate the same quantity for a shu   ed sequence of events

as a reference. the shu   ed sequence has the same time interval distribution as the original sequence,
but with a randomized order in the occurrence of events. in both cases, a power-law of a(t )     t      

describes a(t ) very well. usually it is assumed that slow (power law) decay of the autocorrelation

function is an indicator for long time memory processes. however, if independent random intervals taken

from a power law distribution separate the events, the resulting autocorrelation will also show power law

time dependence [55, 56]. assuming that the exponent of the independent inter-event time distribution

is    and the exponent of the decay of the correlation function is   , we have the relationship    +    = 2.

deviations from this scaling law re   ect intrinsic correlations in the events.

there is another measure which indicates long time correlations between the events even more sensi-

tively. take a period to be bursty if the time interval between each pair of successive edits is not larger

than w, and de   ne e as the number of events in the bursty periods. if events in the time series are

independent and there is no memory in the system (i.e. in a poisson process), one can easily show that

p (e) should have an exponential decay, whereas in the presence of long range memory, the decay is
in the form of p (e)     e      [56]. in figure 11, p (e) is shown for samples of highly controversial and

peaceful articles. in the high controversy sample a well de   ned slope of -2.83 is observed, while in the

low controversy sample edits are more independent and p (e) is very close to the one obtained for the

shu   ed sequence. note that by shu   ing the sequence of time intervals, all the correlations are eliminated

and the resulting sequence should mimic the features of an uncorrelated occurrence of the intervals.

the same measurements are performed for a sample of users, see figure s1 in supporting information.

in table.1, a summary of the scaling exponents for the both article samples and users is reported.

the simplest explanation of these results is to say that con   icts induce correlations in the editing

history of articles. this can already be seen in figure 10, where shu   ing in   uences the decay of the

autocorrelation functions much more for high-m articles than for low-m ones. for the more sensitive

measure p (e) the original and the shu   ed data are again quite close to each other for the low-m case,

while a power-law type decay can be observed in the empirical data for high-m articles.

overall patterns of con   icts

before we can consider the macro-scale evolution of m (during the entire life of the article), we need to

make an important distinction between endo- and exogenous causes of con   ict. our principal interest is

with endogenous forces, which originate in internal sources of con   ict and disagreement, but it cannot be

denied that in a signi   cant number of cases con   icts are occasioned by some exogenous event, typically

some recent development related to the real-world subject of the article rather than to its text (see

10

figure12 for some examples).

categorization

in the presence of signi   cant exogenous events one can best follow the increase of m as a function of time

m (t), but if endogenous edits dominate (as is the case with most science articles and bibliographies of

persons long dead) it is more natural to trace m as a function of the number of edits on the article m (n)

because temporal frequency of edits changes from time to time and from article to article, due to many

di   erent known and unknown causes [57, 58]. since exogenous factors are completely unpredictable, in

the following section we try to categorize articles according to m (n).

even if we restrict attention to endogenous growth, very di   erent patterns can be observed in the

evolution of m , depending not just on the current controversiality of a subject (by de   nition, m never

decreases except for small truncation e   ects due to changes in who are the most engaged pair of reverters),

but also on the micro-dynamics of edit wars. here we try to recognize some general features based on

numerical properties of m (n) and its derivative, and categorize the articles accordingly. we applied a

maximum detection tool to the smoothed derivative curve to locate both the hot periods of wars and the

   consensus reached    situations where the derivative of m (n) is very small or zero. based on the statistics

of the war and consensus periods, we categorize articles into three main categories.

a) consensus. the common scenario for the cases where at the end consensus is reached is the

following. usually growth starts slowly and with an increasing acceleration until it reaches a maximum

speed of growth. afterwards, when the hot period of war is passed, the growth rate decreases and

consensus is reached, where m does not, or only very slightly, increases upon the next edits. we do not

o   er a mathematical model for such growth here, but we note that a gompertz function m (n) = m   ebecn

(with m    being the    nal value of m , and (b, c < 0) are the displacement parameter and growth rate

respectively) o   ers a reasonable    t (r2 > 0.95) for almost all m (n) in this category (see figure 13 for

an example).

in general, the gompertz function fares better than sigmoid because it does not force

symmetry around the initial and the    nal asymptote, and the literature such as [59] suggests it is a more

appropriate model for growth in a con   ned space. we leave the matter of how controversiality becomes

11

a consumable resource for future research, but we    nd it quite plausible that certain articles can become

so well polished that it becomes extremely hard to pick a    ght about them.

b) sequence of temporary consensuses. the common feature of the articles in this category is

sequential appearance of war and peace periods in a quasi-periodic manner. after the    rst cycle of war

and consensus as described in (a), internal or external causes initiate another cycle. exogenous changes

happen completely randomly, but the endogenous causes may be contributed by a simple mechanism

such as a constant in   ux of new editors, who are not satis   ed with the previously settled state of the

article (see figure 14 for an example).

we do not have the means to make the required systematic distinction between internal end external

causes (manual evaluation is too expensive, auto-detection would require too much world knowledge).

therefore, we created a limited sample of 44 articles, which are entirely about solid concepts and facts, in

order to measure the periodicity of endogenous controversies. figure 15 gives a histogram of the distance
(number of edits) between two successive war periods. we obtain a mean value of n    = 1300    90.

c) never-ending wars.

in the evolution of the articles in this category no permanent, or even

temporary, consensus gets ever built. articles describing intrinsically highly controversial/hot topics

tend to belong in this category.

we sorted all articles with m    > 1000 in one of the categories (a-c) and calculated the relative share

of each category at a given m   . the results are shown in figure 17. keeping in mind that less than 1%
of wp pages is controversial (some 12 k out of 3.2 m in the original data set have m     103), we see that

only a small fraction of these    t the    multiple consensuses    category (b), with the majority    tting rather

clearly in the two polarly opposed classes (a) and (c). quite as expected, with the growth of m category

(a) dies out, since consensus is reached, and only articles in the never-ending war category remain. while

in earlier research we set the controversiality threshold at m > 103, figure 17 is suggestive that there is

hope for consensus by natural process as long as m < 106, while the remaining subjects are truly    bad

apples   , and it is a credit to the wp community that such cases are kept to a minuscule proportion of

less than 100 in the entire set of 3.2 m articles.

talk pages and con   ict resolution

talk pages (also known as a discussion pages) in wp are supposed to be pages where editors can discuss

improvements to an article or other wikipedia page [60]. each article could have its own talk page in

addition to user talk pages, which host more personal discussions. in ref. [34], case studies of talk pages

of 58 selected articles were reported     the authors concluded that a considerable portion of talk pages are

dedicated to discussions about removed materials and controversial edits. in the following, we report our

preliminary results on how well talk pages re   ect editorial wars and to what extent they help in resolving

12

disputes.

talk page length

those familiar only with the english wp may come to the conclusion that the length of talk pages

associated to each article could provide a simple, direct measure of controversiality, especially as the

whole mechanism of talk pages was invented to channel controversies. as can be seen from figure 18,

article length and talk page length are distributed quite di   erently, with the log-normal providing a very

good    t for article length (and a reasonable genesis as a multiplicative process with a left barrier, here

the minimum length of an article, [61]) but not for talk page length, which is no surprise, since there is

no left barrier for the lengths of the talk pages. (we mention that the total number of edits on an article

has also been argued to be log-normally distributed [33].)

as can be seen from figure 19, the correlation between article and talk page length is not very strong

(c = 0.26)     the most natural hypothesis is that the discrepancy is caused by the fact that articles

of the same length can nevertheless have di   erent degrees of controversiality. in the english wp talk

page length correlates reasonably well (c = 0.54) with m (see figure 20), yet in other wps, talk pages

are used far less: for example, in the hungarian wp editors solve their con   icts directly on the pages,

changing and reverting the versions which they do not like, generally without any talk or arguments,

while in the spanish wp (which has the longest talk pages after id172 by article length) or the

czech wp, the talk pages are generally more cooperative. according to this result, it becomes evident

that the philosophy of    talk before type    [62] is not truly followed in practice. depending on culture, talk

pages can be re   ective of the con   icts and edit wars, but they do not act as a dampening mechanism.

discussion networks

we begin by some qualitative observations that emerge from the manual study of the networks of editorial

interactions such as depicted in figure21. it appears that the discussions on talk pages are dominated

by continual back and forth between those editors who hardly change their opinion. in contrast to other

13

social networks, clusters beyond pairs are rare. editors joining the discussion at later stages have very

little chance of becoming one of these high-activity editors. less active editors tend to address the more

active ones rather than each other     from studying the text one gets the distinct impression that they

do not consider the other low activity editors worthy of commenting upon. also, the less proli   c editors

appear more negative, more    erce, hysterical in tone, sometimes downright irrational. debates rarely

conclude on the basis of merit: typically they are ended by outside intervention, sheer exhaustion, or the

evident numerical dominance of one group.

based on these observations we hypothesized that most of the editorial war is carried on by only a

few editors. to check this, we have looked at the top 5 ratio, r5(n) de   ned as m5(n)/m (n) where m5

is the value of m only considering the contributions of the top 5 pair of editors (ranked by their mutual

reverts) among all the editor pairs of the article. in figure 22, values of r5 calculated from the whole

sample are visualized as a function of n and m . the color code is corresponding to the average value of

r5 for the points located in each cell. perhaps surprisingly, this number is quite large (> 0.5)) for many

articles and for long periods of the article   s life, meaning that a large fraction of the whole war is indeed

caused by a small number of    ghting pairs. r5 becomes smaller than 0.5 only for the articles which are

already in the controversial region (m > 1000) and were edited many times (n > 104). smaller values

of r5 can be observed only in the articles which belong to the category of never-ending wars. in these

articles, many di   erent editors have fought at di   erent periods of time, and a steady    ow of replacement

armies keeps the article always far from equilibrium.

in conclusion, we showed that con   icts and editorial wars, although restricted to a limited number of

articles which can be e   ciently located, consume considerable amounts of editorial resources. moreover,

we observed that con   icts have their own temporal    ngerprint which is rooted in memory e   ects and the

correlation between edits by di   erent editors. finally, we demonstrated that, even in the controversial

articles, often a consensus can be achieved in a reasonable time, and that those articles which do not

achieve consensus are driven by an in   ux of newly arriving editors and external events. we believe that

these empirical results could serve as the basis of more theoretical agent-centered models which could

extend beyond the wp development process to other large-scale collective and collaborative problem-

solving projects.

14

acknowledgments

financial support from eu   s fp7 fet-open to ictecollective project no. 238597 and otka grant

no. 82333 are acknowledged. we thank farzaneh kaveh and m  arton mesty  an for helping us perform

and validate the human judgment experiments and hoda sepehri rad for useful discussions and technical

remarks on implementation of the ranking algorithm. comments from an anonymous plos one reviewer

led to signi   cant improvements in the presentation and are gratefully acknowledged.

references

1. http://www.gnu.org/gnu.

2. gowers t, nielsen m (2009) massively collaborative mathematics. nature 461: 879.

3. http://www.wikipedia.org.

4. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/wikipedia:policies_and_guidelines.

5. giles j (2005) internet encyclopaedias go head to head. nature 438: 900.

6. voss j (2005) measuring wikipedia.

international conference of the international society for

scientometrics and informetrics : 10th, stockholm (sweden), 24-28 july 2005.

7. ortega f, gonzalez barahona jm (2007) quantitative analysis of the wikipedia community of

users. in: proceedings of the 2007 international symposium on wikis. new york, ny, usa: acm,

wikisym    07, pp. 75   86.

8. halavais a, lacka    d (2008) an analysis of topical coverage of wikipedia. journal of computer-

mediated communication 13: 429   440.

9. kittur a, chi eh, suh b (2009) what   s in wikipedia?: mapping topics and con   ict using socially

annotated category structure.

in: proceedings of the 27th international conference on human

factors in computing systems. new york, ny, usa: acm, chi    09, pp. 1509   1512.

10. buriol l, castillo c, donato d, leonardi s, millozzi s (2006) temporal analysis of the wikigraph.

in: web intelligence, 2006. wi 2006. ieee/wic/acm international conference on. pp. 45 -51.

15

11. capocci a, servedio vdp, colaiori f, buriol ls, donato d, et al. (2006) preferential attachment

in the growth of social networks: the internet encyclopedia wikipedia. phys rev e 74: 036116.

12. zlati  c v, bo  zi  cevi  c m,   stefan  ci  c h, domazet m (2006) wikipedias: collaborative web-based en-

cyclopedias as complex networks. phys rev e 74: 016115.

13. zlati  c v,   stefan  ci  c h (2011) model of wikipedia growth based on information exchange via recip-

rocal arcs. epl 93: 58005.

14. ratkiewicz j, flammini a, menczer f (2010) tra   c in social media i: paths through information

networks. in: social computing (socialcom), 2010 ieee second international conference on. pp.

452 -458.

15. strube m, ponzetto sp (2006) wikirelate! computing semantic relatedness using wikipedia. in:

proceedings of the 21st national conference on arti   cial intelligence. aaai press, volume 2, pp.

1419   1424.

16. ponzetto sp, strube m (2007) knowledge derived from wikipedia for computing semantic related-

ness. j artif int res 30: 181   212.

17. medelyan o, milne d, legg c, witten ih (2009) mining meaning from wikipedia. international

journal of human-computer studies 67: 716 - 754.

18. tyers f, pienaar j (2008) extracting bilingual word pairs from wikipedia. in: proceedings of the

saltmil workshop at language resources and evaluation conference. lrec08.

19. sharo    sks, hartley a (2008) seeking needles in the web haystack: finding texts suitable for

language learners. in: 8th teaching and language corpora conference. talc-8.

20. yasseri t, kornai a, kert  esz j (2012) a practical approach to language complexity: a wikipedia

case study. submitted .

21. javanmardi s, lopes c, baldi p (2010) modeling user reputation in wikis. statistical analysis and

data mining 3: 126   139.

22. javanmardi s, lopes c (2010) statistical measure of quality in wikipedia. in: proceedings of the

first workshop on social media analytics. new york, ny, usa: acm, soma    10, pp. 132   138.

16

23. kimmons r (2011) understanding collaboration in wikipedia. first monday 16.

24. potthast m, stein b, gerling r (2008) automatic vandalism detection in wikipedia. in: proceed-

ings of the ir research, 30th european conference on advances in information retrieval. berlin,

heidelberg: springer-verlag, ecir   08, pp. 663   668.

25. smets k, goethals b, verdonk b (2008) automatic vandalism detection in wikipedia: towards a

machine learning approach. in: aaai workshop wikipedia and arti   cial intelligence: an evolving

synergy. association for the advancement of arti   cial intelligence, wikiai08, pp. 43   48.

26. adler b, de alfaro l, mola-velasco s, rosso p, west a (2011) wikipedia vandalism detection:

combining natural language, metadata, and reputation features. in: gelbukh a, editor, compu-

tational linguistics and intelligent text processing, springer berlin / heidelberg, volume 6609 of

lecture notes in computer science. pp. 277-288.

27. hu m, lim ep, sun a, lauw hw, vuong bq (2007) measuring article quality in wikipedia: models

and evaluation. in: proceedings of the sixteenth acm conference on conference on information

and knowledge management. new york, ny, usa: acm, cikm    07, pp. 243   252.

28. leskovec j, huttenlocher d, kleinberg j (2010) governance in social media: a case study of the

wikipedia promotion process.

in: proceedings of the international conference on weblogs and

social media. icwsm   10.

29. mcdonald dw, javanmardi s, zachry m (2011) finding patterns in behavioral observations by

automatically labeling forms of wikiwork in barnstars. in: proceedings of the 7th international

symposium on wikis and open collaboration. new york, ny, usa: acm, wikisym    11, pp.

15   24.

30. laniado d, tasso r, volkovich y, kaltenbrunner a (2011) when the wikipedians talk: network

and tree structure of wikipedia discussion pages. in: 5th international aaai conference on weblogs

and social media. icwsm 2011, pp. 177   184.

31. massa p (2011) social networks of wikipedia. in: proceedings of the 22nd acm conference on

hypertext and hypermedia. new york, ny, usa: acm, ht    11, pp. 221   230.

17

32. laniado d, tasso r (2011) co-authorship 2.0: patterns of collaboration in wikipedia. in: proceed-

ings of the 22nd acm conference on hypertext and hypermedia. new york, ny, usa: acm, ht

   11, pp. 201   210.

33. wilkinson dm, huberman ba (2007) assessing the value of cooperation in wikipedia. first monday

12.

34. schneider j, passant a, breslin j (2010) a qualitative and quantitative analysis of how wikipedia

talk pages are used. in: proceedings of the websci10: extending the frontiers of society, april

26-27th, 2010, raleigh, nc: us. pp. 1-7.

35. ratkiewicz j, fortunato s, flammini a, menczer f, vespignani a (2010) characterizing and

modeling the dynamics of online popularity. phys rev lett 105: 158701.

36. samson k, nowak a (2010) linguistic signs of destructive and constructive processes in con   ict.

iacm 23rd annual conference paper .

37. suh b, chi e, pendleton b, kittur a (2007) us vs. them: understanding social dynamics in

wikipedia with revert graph visualizations. in: visual analytics science and technology, 2007.

vast 2007. ieee symposium on. pp. 163 -170.

38. kittur a, suh b, pendleton ba, chi eh (2007) he says, she says: con   ict and coordination in

wikipedia. in: proceedings of the sigchi conference on human factors in computing systems.

new york, ny, usa: acm, chi    07, pp. 453   462.

39. vuong bq, lim ep, sun a, le mt, lauw hw (2008) on ranking controversies in wikipedia:

models and evaluation. in: proceedings of the international conference on web search and web

data mining. new york, ny, usa: acm, wsdm    08, pp. 171   182.

40. zha h (2002) generic summarization and keyphrase extraction using mutual reinforcement prin-

ciple and sentence id91. in: proceedings of the 25th annual international acm sigir con-

ference on research and development in information retrieval. new york, ny, usa: acm, sigir

   02, pp. 113   120.

41. brandes u, lerner j (2008) visual analysis of controversy in user-generated encyclopedias. infor-

mation visualization 7: 34-48.

18

42. brandes u, kenis p, lerner j, van raaij d (2009) network analysis of collaboration structure in

wikipedia. in: proceedings of the 18th international conference on world wide web. new york,

ny, usa: acm, www    09, pp. 731   740.

43. sumi r, yasseri t, rung a, kornai a, kert  esz j (2011) characterization and prediction of

wikipedia edit wars. in: proceedings of the acm websci   11, koblenz, germany. pp. 1-3.

44. sumi r, yasseri t, rung a, kornai a, kert  esz j (2011) edit wars in wikipedia.

in: privacy,

security, risk and trust (passat), 2011 ieee third international conference on and 2011 ieee

third international confernece on social computing (socialcom). pp. 724-727.

45. http://dumps.wikimedia.org.

46. rivest rl (1992) the md5 message-digest algorithm. internet request for comments : rfc 1321.

47. yasseri t, et al (2012) most controversial topics in wikipedia: a multilingual analysis. in prepara-

tion .

48. west ag, kannan s, lee i detecting wikipedia vandalism via spatio-temporal analysis of revision

metadata. in: proceedings of the third european workshop on system security. pp. 22-28.

49. goh ki, barab  asi al (2008) burstiness and memory in complex systems. epl 81: 48002.

50. barab  asi al (2005) the origin of bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics. nature 435: 207   211.

51. http://en.wp.org/wiki/list_of_controversial_articles.

52. http://www.gnuplot.info.

53. wikipedia (2012).

levenbergmarquardt algorithm     wikipedia,

the

free

encyclope-

dia.

url http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=levenberg%e2%80%93marquardt_

algorithm&oldid=486636602. [online; accessed 23-april-2012].

54. v  azquez a, oliveira jag, dezs  o z, goh ki, kondor i, et al. (2006) modeling bursts and heavy

tails in human dynamics. phys rev e 73: 036127.

55. vajna s, toth b, j kert  esz j (2012) to be published .

19

56. karsai m, kaski k, barab  asi al, kert  esz j (2011). universal features of correlated bursty be-

haviour, scienti   c reports (accepted). arxiv:1111.7235.

57. ratkiewicz j, menczer f, fortunato s, flammini a, vespignani a (2010) tra   c in social media ii:

modeling bursty popularity. in: social computing (socialcom), 2010 ieee second international

conference on. pp. 393 -400.

58. yasseri t, sumi r, kert  esz j (2012) circadian patterns of wikipedia editorial activity: a demo-

graphic analysis. plos one 7: e30091.

59. laird ak (1964) dynamics of tumor growth. br j cancer 18: 490   502.

60. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/help:using_talk_pages.

61. champernowne dg (1973) the distribution of income between persons. cambridge: cambridge

university press.

62. viegas fb, wattenberg m, kriss j, van ham f (2007) talk before you type: coordination in

wikipedia. in: system sciences, 2007. hicss 2007. 40th annual hawaii international conference

on. p. 78.

figures

20

figure 1. revert and mutual revert maps of benjamin franklin (left) and israel and the
apartheid analogy (right). diagrams in upper row show the map of all reverts, whereas only mutual
reverts are depicted on the diagrams in the lower row. n r and n d are the number of edits made by the
reverting and reverted editors respectively. size of the dots is proportional to the number of reverts by
the same reverting and reverted pair of editors.

21

figure 2. the percentage of true positives in detection of controversial articles compared
to human judgment at di   erent values of m . a threshold of m     1000 for controversiality is
selected according to this diagram.

figure 3. histogram of articles according to their controversiality measure m . there are
some 84 k articles with m > 100, 12 k controversial articles with m > 103, and less than 100
super-controversial articles with m > 106

figure 4. temporal edit patterns of lady gaga and homosexuality during a one month
period (12/2009). the horizontal axis is time, each vertical line represents a single edit. despite the
large di   erences in average time intervals between successive edits, the bursty editing pattern is
common to both cases.

22

figure 5. pdf of the average time   0 between two successive edits of articles measured in
days. in any two week period most of the articles are edited twice or more.

figure 6. scatter plot of the average time interval between successive edits and the
controversy measure. color coding is according to logarithm of the density of points. the
correlation coe   cient c =    0.03.

23

figure 7. scatter plot of burstiness and the controversy measure. color coding according to
logarithm of the density of points. the correlation coe   cient c = 0.05.

24

figure 8. histogram of burstiness of a) all edits, b) reverts, and c) mutual reverts for
four classes of articles. high controversy (m > 1000, topmost panels),listed as controversial (2nd
panels), randomly selected (3rd panels), and featured articles (bottom panels).

25

figure 9. pdf of intervals between two successive edits on an article (in seconds) for two
samples of highly/weakly disputed articles (left/right panel). each sample contains 20 articles
and the average    for all articles is about 10 hours. circles are empirical data and solid lines are model
   t, with values l = 20, p = 0.9 and l = 500, p = 0.5 respectively for disputed and non-disputed
samples. the dashed line in the left panel is the power law with exponent    = 0.97.

figure 10. autocorrelation function of edits sequences for two samples of highly/weakly
disputed articles (left/right panel). circles are for the original sequences, empty squares
correspond to the shu   ed sequences. dashed lines are power-law    ts.

26

figure 11. distribution of e for two samples of highly/weakly disputed articles (left/right
panel). circles are for the original sequences, whereas empty squares correspond to the shu   ed
sequences. dashed lines are exponential    ts to the p (e) for shu   ed data and solid line in the left panel
is a power-law with    = 2.83.

figure 12. time evolution of the controversy measure of michael jackson. a: jackson is
acquitted on all counts after    ve month trial. b: jackson makes his    rst public appearance since the
trial to accept eight records from the guinness world records in london, including most successful
entertainer of all time. c: jackson issues thriller 25. d: jackson dies in los angeles.

27

figure 13. evolution of controversy measure with number of edits of jyllands-posten
muhammad cartoons controversy, with gompertz    t shown in red. the initial rapid growth in
m tends to saturate, corresponding to the reaching to consensus.

figure 14. evolution of controversy measure with number of edits of of iran     the insets
depict focuses of some of the local war periods. m (n) is normalized to the    nal value m   .
cycles of peace and war appear consequently, activated by internal and external causes.

28

figure 15. length of peacful periods. histogram of number of edits between two successive war
periods for a selected sample of 44 articles which are not driven by external events. the average value
of n    is 1300 edits.

figure 16. evolution of controversy measure with number of edits of anarchism and barack
obama. m (n) is normalized to the    nal value m   . there is no consensus even for a short period and
editorial wars continue nonstop.

29

figure 17. relative share of each category at di   erent m . blue: category (a), consensus. red:
category (b), multi-consensus. yellow: category (c), never-ending war. for the precise de   nition of
each category see the main text.

30

figure 18. length distribution of articles and talk pages with log-normals    ts. the
distribution of articles length is better described by a log-normal distribution compared to the talk
length distribution, which tends to be more like a power-law.

figure 19. scatter plot of talk page vs. article length. color coding is according to logarithm of
the density of points. the correlation between the length of the article and the corresponding talk page
is weak, c = 0.26.

31

figure 20. scatter plot of talk page length vs. m . color coding is according to logarithm of the
density of points. there is a rather clear correlation, c = 0.54 between the length of the talk page and
the controversality of the article.

figure 21. network representation of editors    interactions in the discussion page of
safavid dynasty. each circle is an editor, red arrows represent comments opposing the target editor,
t-end green lines represent positive comments (agreeing with the other editor), and yellow lines with
round end represent neutral comments. line thickness is proportional to the number of times that the
same interaction occurs. data based entirely on subjective assessments (manual review).

32

figure 22. average r5 = m5(n)/m (n), color coded for di   erent m    s and n   s. for a wide range
of articles and in a long time of their lives r5, the relative contribution of the top 5 most reverting pair
of editors, is very close to 1, making clear the important role of the top 5 pairs of    ghting editors.

33

tables

table 1. scaling exponents for the two samples of controversial and peaceful articles, and
users.

low m articles
high m articles

users

  

0.89    0.02
0.56    0.01
0.46    0.01

  
-

2.83    0.06
3.05    0.03

  
-

0.97    0.01
1.44    0.01

edit patterns of controversial articles and activity patterns of users show all the expected features of
bursty correlated processes.

supporting information

text s1: details of classi   cation experiments

during our work we frequently solicited human judgment on how peaceful or controversial certain pages

appear to the observer. rather than relying on the everyday meaning of peaceful versus controversial, we

have instructed the judges to use several con   uent criteria that we list here in no particular order.

    rant: truly hysterical behaviour without much content, usually against someone or a group of

editors

    help: asking for outside help or the help of other editors

    vote: voting, merging, moving or talking about these

    prot: talking about protecting the page

    ban: talking about banning somebody

    warn: warning about some bad consequences if somebody does something

    command: ordering, rather than asking, somebody to do, and especially to not do, something

    rev: talking about reverts

    irony: ironizing over the others. this could be very rude when it is observed jointly with other

symptoms like accusation but could be quite sophisticated used by senior editors who are generally

34

very neutral (not accusing, warning etc.). same tag used for any form of malicious joking at the

expense of others

    acc: accusing somebody in the talk of pov, not reading comments, not understanding them,

repeating the same arguments etc.

    rep: talk about repeating the same problems or arguments over and over again

    comp: complaining about anything, generally about the others    behavior

    emo: using emotion related words in argumentation: e.g. i strongly disagree, are you kidding?

etc.

    formal: using formal naming style: e.g. referring to other user as user tabib or mr. tabib rather

than the usual tabib

    utcite: citing user talk pages

    selfsupp: writing something than adding some new comments immediately

    stepwise: answering former comment line by line

needless to say, judging many of these criteria is also a highly subjective matter: who is to say whether

a certain passage is ironic, whether it truly constitutes a warning, or whether it is a rant? nevertheless,

human judges showed quite signi   cant correlation with one another (and with the machine-generated

m score, as seen e.g.

in fig 2). in the body of the paper we reported on experiments that took the

high-con   ict sample from the range 10, 000 < m < 70, 000 and the low-con   ict control from the range

100 < m < 150, i.e. on the average a factor of 280 between the two groups.

to test how well humans do, we constructed a less sharply separated sample of 30 pages with m     50
for low con   ict and 30 pages with m     2, 500 for high con   ict, i.e. on the average a factor of 50 between

the two groups. we had four human judges, instructed in the above criteria, who had to check all 60

pages given to them in random order. the most peace-leaning judge found 33 instances of controversality,

the most war-leaning judge found 39 (in accordance with our design of the measure m , which aimed at

generating fewer false positives than false negatives). remarkably, the correlation between the most

lenient and the most strict judge is still r = 0.92, with a    coe   cient of 0.79, at the high end of what

is generally considered    substantial    agreement.

(this is the worst case: the correlation between the

35

most war-leaning judge and the other two judges is 0.935 and 0.987, cohen   s    is 0.82 and 0.96, usually

considered    almost perfect    agreement.)

not only are the opinions of the judges correlated, they show evident graduality: if the most peace-

leaning judge declares a page controversial, the other three will declare it controversial with id203

1, 0.9, and 1 respectively, and if the most war-leaning judge declares it peaceful the others will also do

so with id203 1, 1, and 0.9. the result is a manifestly bimodal distribution, where if we assign one

point for each vote of controversality, 49 pages receive 0 or 4 points, another 10 receive 1 or 3 points, and

only 1 page in the entire sample of 60 receives 2 points, truly splitting the judges. were the judgments

uncorrelated, we would expect to see the exact opposite picture, with most pages (22.5 out of 60) receiving

a score of 2, 15-15 receiving 1 and 3, and less than 8 receiving some extreme score.

based on this level of interobserver agreement there cannot be any doubt that manual classi   cation

of wp pages as peaceful vs.

controversial can be done quite reliably. this is not to say that the

process is completely repeatable, but even a lot simpler classi   cation tasks, such as deciding weather a

character is an l or a 1, or whether a word in some context is a noun or a verb, tend to fall shy of r or

   > 0.95. however, we relied on human judgment only to the extent it was necessary to create, calibrate,

and validate our controversy measure m , all subsequent results use m directly and are therefore fully

replicable.

it is perhaps worth pointing out that our primary interest is not with the human concept of con-

troversality, but rather with the wars themselves. accordingly, we have not made an all out e   ort to

minimize the misclassi   cation rate of m , and there is no doubt that by including more factors (ranging

from talk page length to the number of times banning somebody is discussed) a much more sensitive

measure could be developed. however, as m correlates nearly as well with human judgment as the least

correlated humans correlate with one another, r = 0.80 vs. r = 0.85, there is no reason to believe that a

more sensitive measure would substantially alter the picture presented here.

36

figure s1. burst statistics for users    editorial activity. upper panel: distribution of time
interval between two successive edits made by a certain user on any article    . middle panel: e, the
number of events in the bursty periods separated by a silence window of w. lower panel:
autocorrelation function a(t ) for the editing time train of individual users.

