proceedings, ci 2012

motivations for participation in socially networked

collective intelligence systems

jon chamberlain, udo kruschwitz, massimo poesio

school of computer science and electronic engineering

university of essex

wivenhoe park, colchester co4 3sq, england

{jchamb,udo,poesio}@essex.ac.uk

2
1
0
2

 
r
p
a
8
1

 

 
 
]
i
s
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
7
0
4

.

4
0
2
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract
one of the most signi   cant challenges facing systems of
collective intelligence is how to encourage participation
on the scale required to produce high quality data. this
paper details ongoing work with phrase detectives, an
online game-with-a-purpose deployed on facebook, and
investigates user motivations for participation in social
network gaming where the wisdom of crowds produces
useful data.

introduction
recent advances in human language technology have
been made possible by acquiring large-scale resources
created by novel methods of harnessing collective intel-
ligence over the internet. this approach is motivated
by the observation that a group of individuals can con-
tribute to a collective solution, which has a better per-
formance and is more robust than an individual   s so-
lution. this is demonstrated in simulations of collec-
tive behaviour in self-organizing systems (johnson, ras-
mussen, joslyn, rocha, smith & kantor 1998).

collective intelligence (ci) systems such as wikipedia
and similar large initiatives have shown that a surprising
number of individuals can be willing to participate in
projects.

a novel approach was the development of games-with-a-
purpose (gwap) that aggregate data from non-expert
players for collective decisions similar to what might be
expected from an expert.

encouraging participation in gwap projects remains a
signi   cant challenge, despite successful early e   orts (von
ahn 2006).

this paper investigates user participation in ci systems
and whether social network platforms could o   er any-
thing to this approach. the paper then goes on to
describe phrase detectives, a gwap for creating an-
notated language resources, speci   cally looking at the
interface that was developed for the facebook platform
and the modi   cations that were made to maximise the
social incentives for players. data from over a year of the
game being live on facebook is analysed and, in conclu-
sion, suggestions are proposed for developers considering
using a social networking platform for deployment of ci
interfaces.

collective intelligence systems
collective intelligence can be shown in many domains in-
cluding computer science, economics and biology1 but
here we focus on coordinating collective action in compu-
tational systems of ci. individual decisions made by the
community are aggregated in an attempt to produce a
high quality, collective decision comparable to an expert
judgement.

one important goal of ci systems is to overcome the bot-
tleneck in creating and maintaining resources that would
normally have to be done by paid administrators. exam-
ples include encyclopedia websites like wikipedia, citizen
science projects for common knowledge and games-with-
a-purpose that collect metadata.

by collecting decisions from a large, distributed group
of contributors it is possible to approximate a sin-
gle expert   s judgements (snow, o   connor, jurafsky &
ng 2008). this is in line with    ndings in other contexts
(feng, besana & zajac 2009, albakour, kruschwitz &
lucas 2010).

participation
the willingness of web users to collaborate in the cre-
ation of resources is clearly illustrated by wikipedia. en-
glish wikipedia numbers (as of october 2011) 3,773,941
articles, written by over 15.5 million collaborators and
5,559 reviewers.2

citizen science projects, where non-expert volunteers
complete large-scale or computationally di   cult tasks,
include open mind commonsense3 (now conceptnet4)
which demonstrated that web collaboration can be re-
lied on to create resources, with 14,500 volunteers con-
tributing nearly 700,000 sentences (singh 2002).

the    rst, and perhaps most successful, game-with-a-
purpose was the esp game5 which attracted over
200,000 players who have produced over 50 million labels
(von ahn 2006).

1http://scripts.mit.edu/   cci/hci
2http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/list of wikipedias
3http://openmind.media.mit.edu
4http://conceptnet.media.mit.edu
5http://www.gwap.com/gwap

proceedings, ci 2012

figure 1. screenshot of the phrase detectives facebook homepage.

clearly there is huge potential for the general public to
become engaged in ci systems and collaborate in pro-
ducing resources that would not be possible to achieve
using traditional methods.

social networking platforms
given the social nature of ci it seems logical to deploy
ci systems on platforms where the users are already net-
worked.
in recent years social networking has become
the dominant pastime online. as much as 22% of time
online is spent on social networks like facebook, mys-
pace, bebo, twitter and others. this is three times the
amount of time spent emailing and 7 times the amount
of time spent searching the internet.6

the success of social network games such as cityville,
with over 50 million active players each month, or the
sims, farmville and texas holdem poker, with over 30
million active monthly players each, show that the poten-
tial for large scale participation is possible using social
networking platforms.7

an estimated 927 million hours are spent each month by

6http://mashable.com/2010/08/02/stats-time-spent-online
7http://www.appdata.com

facebook users playing games8, which is another indica-
tor of the vast human resource available.

a study of us and uk social network users showed that
facebook was by far the most frequently used platform
for social network gaming (used by 83% of users, com-
pared to myspace, the next highest platform, at 24%).9
however google are planning to increase their market
share of this valuable resource.10

human language technology games integrated into so-
cial networking sites such as sentiment quiz11 on face-
book show that social interaction within a game environ-
ment does motivate players to participate (rafelsberger
& scharl 2009).

it is becoming more apparent that ci interfaces should
be linked to social networking sites like facebook to
achieve high visibility, to explore di   erent ways play-
ers can collaborate and to exploit this enormous human
resource.

8http://www.allfacebook.com/facebook-games-statistics-
2010-09
9http://www.infosolutionsgroup.com/2010 popcap social
gaming research results.pdf

10http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/08/12/us-google-
games-idustre77a66h20110812
11http://apps.facebook.com/sentiment-quiz

proceedings, ci 2012

figure 2. detail of a task presented in annotation mode.

phrase detectives facebook interface
the    rst interface for the phrase detectives game12
(chamberlain, poesio & kruschwitz 2008) enabled groups
of players to work on the same task over a period of
time as this was likely to lead to a collectively intelligent
decision (surowiecki 2005).

the facebook version of phrase detectives13, launched
in february 2011, maintained the overall game architec-
ture whilst incorporating a number of new features de-
veloped speci   cally for the social network platform (see
figure 1).

the game was developed in php sdk (a facebook api
language allowing access to user data, friend lists, wall
posting etc) and integrates seaid113ssly within the face-
book site. data generated from this version of the game
is compatable with previous versions and both current
implementations of the game run simultaneously on the
same corpus of documents.

in order to play the game a facebook user must grant
certain permissions: the basic access (user details and
friends list), which is required for all applications, and
access to posting on the user   s wall. once the user has
allowed the game access they never need to login to the
game, only to facebook.

the game uses 2 styles of text annotation for players to
complete a linguistic task. initially text is presented in
annotation mode (called name the culprit in the game -
see figure 2). this is a straightforward annotation mode
where the player makes an annotation decision about a

12http://www.phrasedetectives.com
13http://apps.facebook.com/phrasedetectives

figure 3. detail of a task presented in validation mode.

highlighted markable (section of text). if di   erent play-
ers enter di   erent interpretations for a markable then
each interpretation is presented to more players in vali-
dation mode (called detectives conference in the game
- see figure 3). the players in validation mode have to
agree or disagree with the interpretation.

players are trained with training texts created from a
gold standard (a text that has been annotated by a lin-
guistic annotation expert). a player always receives a
training text when they    rst start the game and may also
need to complete one when being promoted to the next
level. once the player has completed all of the training
tasks they are given a rating (the percentage of correct
decisions out of the total number of training tasks). the
rating is recorded with every future annotation that the
player makes as the rating is likely to change over time.

the scoring system is designed to reward e   ort and mo-
tivate high quality decisions by awarding points for ret-
rospective collaboration (see figure 4).

the game makes full use of socially motivating factors
inherent in the facebook platform. any of the player   s
friends who are playing the game form the player   s team,
which is visible in the left hand menu. whenever a
player   s decision agrees with a team member they score
additional points.

player levels have well-de   ned criteria and the player
must activate the new level once the criteria are met
(see figure 5):
    total points scored
    the player   s rating
    documents completed
    training documents completed
    facebook posts made from the game

proceedings, ci 2012

figure 4. detail of the reward screen, displayed at the
end of each case, showing the player how many points
they scored and who they agreed with.

the facebook game has monthly and all-time leader-
boards as well as leaderboards for the highest level play-
ers, highest rated players and the players with the biggest
team.

incentives
there are 3 main incentive structures that can be
used to encourage recruitment and participation: per-
sonal; social; and    nancial (chamberlain, poesio &
kruschwitz 2009). all incentives are applied with cau-
tion as rewards have been known to decrease annotation
quality (mrozinski, whittaker & furui 2008).

a previous survey showed that women are more likely to
play social network games than men9 and this could have
an impact on the types of incentives o   ered. facebook
allows access to user data, including gender, as part of
the basic access for the application so gender and work-
load of the players could be investigated.14

personal incentives
personal incentives are evident when simply participat-
ing is enough of a reward for the user. generally, the
most important personal incentive is that the user feels
they are contributing to a worthwhile project.

also important for the players of phrase detectives is
that they read texts that they    nd interesting. the
choice of documents is important in getting users to par-
ticipate in the game, to understand the tasks and to keep
playing. whilst some texts are straightforward, others
can provide a serious challenge of reading comprehension
and completion of linguistic tasks.

texts were graded on complexity (on a scale of 1 to 4)
on import. a player can choose the maximum level of
document complexity they wish to read as they may be

14it was assumed for the purposes of this investigation that
facebook users declare their gender truthfully.

figure 5. detail showing criteria for the next level, dis-
played to the player on their homepage.

motivated to play the game to improve their english
skills or, equally, because they enjoy reading challenging
texts.

social incentives
social incentives reward users by improving their stand-
ing amongst their peers (in this case their fellow players
and friends).

using leaderboards and assigning levels for points can
be an e   ective motivator, with players often using these
as targets i.e., they keep playing to reach a level or high
score before stopping (von ahn & dabbish 2008).

to investigate this in phrase detectives, players were
grouped by how much progress they had made towards
the next level in terms of points they had scored beyond
the requirement for their current level. for example if
a player had 110 points on level 2 (where the points
requirement is 100) and the level 3 requirement is 200
points, then this player has progressed 10% towards the
next level.

news feed (or wall) posting is integrated into the game.
this allows a player to make an automatically generated
post to their news feed which will be seen by all of the
player   s friends (see figure 6).15

the posts include a link back to the game. players are
required to make a post from the game every time they
are promoted to the next level. posting is a very im-
portant factor in recruiting more players as studies have
shown that the majority of social game players start to
play because of a friend recommendation.9 16

posts may be social (display information about the doc-
ument the player is working on or has just completed),
collaborative (asking friends to join the game) or com-
petitive (position in a leaderboard). social posts are
similar to information social network users share with
friends so it is reasonable to assume they will be the
most common type of post made from the game. this
15since the release of the game facebook has changed how
posts are displayed. posts from the game now appear on the
player   s pro   le and in a news ticker.
16http://www.lightspeedresearch.com/press-releases/it   s-
game-on-for-facebook-users

proceedings, ci 2012

figure 6. detail of a news (or wall) post created auto-
matically from the game, as seen by the player   s friend.

was investigated by analysing the logs of wall posts made
from the game.

financial incentives
financial incentives reward e   ort with money. when
   nancial rewards were o   ered in the game they were for
monthly high scores, ranging from   50 for    rst place,
  15 for second place,   10 for third place and   5 for
fourth to tenth place. during july 2011 additional daily
lottery-style prizes of   5 were awarded, along with   20
for the player with the highest level, highest rating and
largest team. the monthly prizes motivate the high-
scoring players to compete with each other by doing more
work and motivate low-scoring players in the early parts
of the month when the high score is low. the prizes were
sent as amazon vouchers by email to the winners.

whilst    nancial incentives are important to recruit new
players, a combination of all 3 types of incentives is essen-
tial for the long term success of a game (smadja 2009).

the e   ectiveness of incentives was analysed by looking
at new players, active players and new annotations each
month. months where prize funds were available were
compared to months where there was none and a per-
annotation cost e   ectiveness was calculated. for the    rst
5 months no prize funds were o   ered but the following
months all had prize funds of   110, except july 2011
which had   320 (see table 1).

the site was promoted in february, july and december
2011 to email lists, existing players, relevant facebook
groups etc, as well as advertised on googleads and face-
book (a modest total pay-per-click budget of   160) and
competition websites.

results
results from the facebook interface of phrase detectives
were analysed from february 2011 to february 2012.

gender and workload of players
the facebook game attracted 612 players of which 63%
were female, 35% were male and 2% did not disclose their
gender. of the ten highest scoring players, 60% were
female, 30% were male and 10% did not disclose their
gender. this supports the previously mentioned survey
that social network games are played predominately by
women.

figure 7. chart showing the scores of players.

figure 8. chart showing the total annotations of players,
ranked by their total score.

in a study of the previous version of phrase detectives it
was reported that the ten highest scoring players (repre-
senting 1.3% of total players) had 60% of the total points
on the system and had made 73% of the annotations17
(chamberlain et al. 2009). in the facebook version of
the game the ten highest scoring players (representing
1.6% of total players) had 89% of the total points and
had made 89% of the annotations (see figure 7). the
same ranking was used in figure 8 to show that although
the total number of annotations of players is generally
in line with points scored it is not always the case.

these results show that the majority of the workload
(in this case annotation of documents) is being done by
a handful of players. however, the in   uence of players
who only contribute a little should not be undervalued
as in some systems it can be as high as 30% of the work-
load (kanefsky, barlow & gulick 2001) and this is what
makes the collective decision making robust.

a subset of 112 players (those that declared their gender,
had a rating above zero and had completed at least one
annotation) were analysed to investigate whether gen-
der was related to the amount of work a player does.
of these players men represented 35% of the total (39
players). on average male players had completed 1,290
annotations and scored 4,636 points, compared to female

17for the purpose of data analysis, annotations and valida-
tions are counted together and referred to as annotations.

proceedings, ci 2012

figure 9.
progress towards the next level.

chart showing the distribution of players   

players who had completed 4,636 annotations and scored
20,776 points. although female players appear to be do-
ing more work on average the di   erence is not statisti-
cally signi   cant (using an unpaired t-test for signi   cance
testing).

the ten highest scoring male players were then compared
to the ten highest scoring female players. on average,
the former had completed 4,817 annotations and scored
17,628 points, whereas the latter had made 48,359 anno-
tations and scored 144,905 points. the di   erence in both
workload and score is statistically signi   cant (p<0.05).

this suggests that not only are female players more likely
to play a socially networked game, they are also more
likely to actively participate than male players. further
analysis is required to investigate whether female players
provide higher quality annotations.

using levels as goals
all players who had a score (i.e. they had passed the
training stage and had completed a document) were cat-
egorised in terms of their progress to the next level. in
the    rst analysis all players from levels 1 to 17 were in-
cluded.

to distinguish between players who gave up after com-
pleting the training (i.e., the early stage of level 1) from
the players stopping after reaching their goal of the next
level, a second analysis was made excluding players on
level 1.

the id91 of players near to the early stages of
progress to the next level (see figure 9) could be an
indication that players are motivated to work towards
the next level before stopping, however the level cri-
teria and scoring system make this di   cult to assess.
players score points in batches because all points scored
on a document are added when the case is completed.
also, at this time, all extra points from other players
who have agreed with their annotations are added. this

figure 10.
posts made by players.

chart showing the breakdown of 423 wall

e   ect becomes more negligible at higher levels where the
progression to the next level is longer.

the analysis looks at player progression at the end of the
data collection period i.e., players who get to the next
level then never play the game again. to investigate this
in detail the progression of each player session should
be plotted however the game is not designed to test this
and, if it were, many more players would be needed.

whilst it is intuitive to think that players will use level
thresholds as goals this evidence does not support it.

posting from the game
players    posts (see figure 10) were most commonly social
i.e., about the document the player was working on or
had just completed (52%). this compares to competitive
posts when they went up a level (13%), when their rating
was updated (10%) or to post about their position in the
leaderboard (12%). the remaining 13% of news posts
were players making a direct collaborative request for
their friends to join the game.

these results support the assumption that players are
most likely to make posts from the game when the infor-
mation is similar to what they might usually post. this
should be a design consideration when developing a ci
system for social networks.

the effect of incentives on recruitment and participation
figure 11 shows the growth of phrase detectives on face-
book. months where there was active promotion of the
site (february, july and december 2011) show increases
in new players, as one would expect. the month with the
largest prize fund also had the most recruitment, double
that of a later month with a smaller prize fund.

based on the assumption that the    rst promotion month,
when the site went live, was an exception as players of
the previous game joined the new version, there is an
indication that    nancial incentives increase recuitment
to the game if su   ciently advertised.

it is noticable that the amount of active players (a player
who made more than one annotation in a particular
month) stayed consistent and does not seem to increase

proceedings, ci 2012

figure 11. chart showing new annotations plotted against new players and active players. prizes were available in the
game from july 2011 to february 2012 (see table 1). * indicates a month with active promotion for the game.

with recruitment or    nancial incentives. whilst it could
be expected that the number of active players steadily
increases over time as more players are recruited, the
results show that most players will play the game for
a short period of time and only small number continue
to play every month. this is con   rmed by the previous
results that only a handful of players do most of the
work.

financial incentives do appear to be a strong motivat-
ing factor when considering how much work the active
players do. months with prizes have considerably more
new annotations than those without, but with a similar
number of active players.

this suggests that active players are motivated by    nan-
cial incentives, however the large amount of gameplay in
october and november 2011 indictae that other moti-
vating factors such as personal and social incentives are,
to some extent, also successful.

cost effectiveness of    nancial incentives
the cost per annotation is a measure of the e   ectiveness
of the prize fund. a baseline of 4699 new annotations per
month could be expected without a prize fund (the aver-
age of the    rst 5 months    new annotations) so anything
over that could be attributed to the prize fund.

the average cost per annotation across the months where
there was a prize fund was   0.0028 (see table 1) and this

can be compared to other ci systems. amazon mechan-
ical turk (mturk)18 is often used as a way of getting
data quickly but can cost   0.007 - 0.70 ($0.01 - 0.10)
per annotation (mason & watts 2010).

both systems require the annotations to be aggregated
before a collectively intelligent answer can be produced
however even professional annotation schemes require
some degree of validation.

the advantage of gwap over mturk is that personal
and social incentives can be used, as well as    nancial, to
minimise the cost and maximise the persistence of the
system.

it is also worth considering the setup and maintenance
costs of ci systems in a cost per annotation analysis.

conclusions
in addition to accessing the vast human resources that
social networking platforms o   er, ci systems can also
take advantage of the inherent social structure and
shared personal data available to maximise the incen-
tives that encourage participation.

phrase detectives has shown some valuable insights into
user motivations in social network gaming and participa-
tion in ci e   orts. the results support previous surveys
that show women are more likely to play, and will spend
more time playing, socially networked games.

18http://www.mturk.com

proceedings, ci 2012

table 1. cost per annotation based on the prize fund.

month
feb - jun 2011
jul 2011
aug 2011
sep 2011
oct 2011
nov 2011
dec 2011
jan 2012
feb 2012

prize fund cost/annotation
-
0.0022
0.0058
0.0042
0.0008
0.0012
0.0025
0.0028
0.0031

-
320
110
110
110
110
110
110
110

there are indications that players want to share infor-
mation from the game that is similar to the information
usually shared in their social networks. the success of a
socially networked game relies on creating an experience
that players want to share with their friends.

the results suggest that attracting and motivating the
right kind of player is as important as attracting lots of
players because, although collective intelligence needs a
crowd, that crowd also needs to do some work. financial
incentives, coupled with promotion, increase recruitment
and have a considerable impact on participation.

the increase in data collected from the game due to    -
nancial incentives still makes it a cost e   ective alterna-
tive to other ci systems such as mturk.

acknowledgments
thanks to ans alghamdi for his work on the face-
book version of the game. the creation of the orig-
inal game was funded by epsrc project anawiki,
ep/f00575x/1.

references
albakour, m.-d., kruschwitz, u. & lucas, s. (2010),
sentence-level attachment prediction, in    proceedings
of the 1st information retrieval facility conference   ,
vol. 6107 of lecture notes in computer science,
springer, vienna, pp. 6   19.

chamberlain, j., poesio, m. & kruschwitz, u. (2008),
phrase detectives: a web-based collaborative
annotation game, in    proceedings of the international
conference on semantic systems (i-semantics   08)   ,
graz.

chamberlain, j., poesio, m. & kruschwitz, u. (2009),
a new life for a dead parrot: incentive structures in the
phrase detectives game, in    proceedings of the www
2009 workshop on web incentives
(webcentives   09)   , madrid.

feng, d., besana, s. & zajac, r. (2009), acquiring
high quality non-expert knowledge from on-demand
workforce, in    proceedings of the 2009 workshop on
the people   s web meets nlp: collaboratively
constructed semantic resources   , people   s web    09,

association for computational linguistics, morristown,
nj, usa, pp. 51   56.

johnson, n. l., rasmussen, s., joslyn, c., rocha, l.,
smith, s. & kantor, m. (1998), symbiotic intelligence:
self-organizing knowledge on distributed networks
driven by human interaction, in    proceedings of the
sixth international conference on arti   cial life   , mit
press.

kanefsky, b., barlow, n. & gulick, v. (2001),    can
distributed volunteers accomplish massive data analysis
tasks?   , lunar and planetary science xxxii.

mason, w. & watts, d. (2010),    financial incentives
and the performance of crowds   , acm sigkdd
explorations newsletter 11(2), 100   108.

mrozinski, j., whittaker, e. & furui, s. (2008),
collecting a why-question corpus for development and
evaluation of an automatic qa-system, in    proceedings
of acl-08: hlt   , association for computational
linguistics, columbus, ohio, pp. 443   451.

rafelsberger, w. & scharl, a. (2009), games with a
purpose for social networking platforms, in
   proceedings of the 20th acm conference on hypertext
and hypermedia   , acm, pp. 193   198.

singh, p. (2002), the public acquisition of
commonsense knowledge, in    proceedings of the aaai
spring symposium on acquiring (and using) linguistic
(and world) knowledge for information access   , palo
alto, ca.

smadja, f. (2009),    mixing    nancial , social and fun
incentives for social voting   , world wide web internet
and web information systems (april).

snow, r., o   connor, b., jurafsky, d. & ng, a. y.
(2008), cheap and fast   but is it good?: evaluating
non-expert annotations for natural language tasks, in
   emnlp    08: proceedings of the conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing   ,
association for computational linguistics, morristown,
nj, usa, pp. 254   263.

surowiecki, j. (2005), the wisdom of crowds, anchor.

von ahn, l. (2006),    games with a purpose   , computer
39(6), 92   94.

von ahn, l. & dabbish, l. (2008),    designing games
with a purpose   , communications of the acm
51(8), 58   67.

