the geographic flow of music

conrad lee and p  draig cunningham

clique research cluster
university college dublin

8 bel   eld of   ce park, clonskeagh

dublin 4, ireland

tel: +353 1 716 5346

email: conradlee@gmail.com, padraig.cunningham@ucd.ie

2
1
0
2

 
r
p
a
2
1

 

 
 
]
i
s
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
7
6
2

.

4
0
2
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract   the social media website last.fm provides a detailed
snapshot of what its users in hundreds of cities listen to each
week. after suitably normalizing this data, we use it to test
three hypotheses related to the geographic    ow of music. the
   rst is that although many of the most popular artists are
listened to around the world, music preferences are closely
related to nationality,
language, and geographic location. we
   nd support for this hypothesis, with a couple of minor, yet
interesting, exceptions. our second hypothesis is that some cities
are consistently early adopters of new music (and early to snub
stale music). to test this hypothesis, we adapt a method previously
used to detect the leadership networks present in    ocks of
birds. we    nd empirical support for the claim that a similar
leadership network exists among cities, and this    nding is the
main contribution of the paper. finally, we test the hypothesis
that large cities tend to be ahead of smaller cities   we    nd only
weak support for this hypothesis.

i. introduction

the question of how information and preferences spread
through social networks has a long and rich history. the topic
became an active    eld of study just after world war two
[1]   [4]; this early work produced, for example, the seminal
two-step    ow of communication hypothesis, which states that
   ideas often    ow from radio and print to opinion leaders, and
from these to the less active sections of the population    [5].
in the 1970s, mark granovetter contributed prominent ideas
to the    eld, including the hypothesis that members of tightly-
knit social groups have largely duplicate information, and rely
on acquaintanceships with members of other groups to gain
access to novel information [6].

more recently, detailed logs of digital communication have
enabled these hypotheses to be tested on datasets that are much
larger than was feasible only a decade earlier. for example,
in [7], bakshy et al. subject 250 million facebook users to
a controlled experiment in order to measure the role that
facebook friends play in in   uencing the diffusion of infor-
mation,    nding that while a user   s most active relationships
are individually the most in   uential, the overall effect of less
active relationships in spreading novel information is stronger.
additional examples of recent signi   cant work includes the
worldwide spread of e-mail chain letters [8], the analysis of
a massive worldwide instant messaging dataset [9], and the
spread of information through the blogosphere [10], [11].

here, we investigate hypotheses related to the geographic
   ow of preferences in music. our main contribution is to for-

malize and answer the following question: if one considers the
month-by-month change in the aggregate musical preferences
of cities, are some cities consistently ahead of others? in other
words, can we    nd that some cities are leaders and others are
followers?

our enquiry into the geographic distribution of musical
preferences is structured as follows. we begin by describing
the data, a world-wide log of listening habits recorded by
last.fm, as well as various pre-processing and id172
steps in section ii. next, in section iii, we measure how
regional musical preferences are,    nding that although many of
the most popular artists are popular all around the world, there
are nonetheless well-de   ned clusters of cities that are closely
related to nationality, language, and geographic distance.

in section iv, we move on to our main contribution: an
analysis of the dynamics of music preferences. we adapt a
methodology previously used to    nd leadership in pigeon
   ocks [12] to detect whether some cities consistently follow
others. at a high level, this methodology involves looking at
every dyad (pair of nodes) and running a test to see whether
the time-lagged correlation is larger in one direction than
another. we observe that when we put all of these directed
pairs together, the resulting networks are nearly acyclic, a
strong indicator that the geographic    ow of music has a clear
direction, i.e., hierarchical structure [13].

recently there has been much excitement surrounding the
observation that productivity, ef   ciency, and innovation all
scale super-linearly with the size of a city [14]   [16]. this line
of reasoning suggests the hypothesis that larger cities should
also be more up to date on the latest and greatest music. we
wrap up our inquiry into the spread of music in section vi by
testing the hypothesis that leadership is also correlated with
the size of a city.

ii. data: preprocessing & id172

last.fm is a service based around collecting data on the
listening habits of its users. users install a plug-in on their
audio players such as itunes or winamp which keeps track
of the songs that the user listens to, either on his computer
or external device (e.g., an ipod). the plug-in uploads this
information to the last.fm database, giving the service a log
of what its users listen to. in 2011 alone, last.fm received 11
billion such noti   cations (called    scrobbles    by last.fm), and

taste,

since the service began in 2003 it has received 61 billion.1
last.fm uses this information in various ways, for example,
to compare the similarity of two users    musical
to
recommend music, and to create a pro   le page.
creating listen matrices. last.fm aggregates this data into
weekly charts for over 200 metropolitan areas around the
world, and makes the data behind these charts accessible
through a public api. for every week and each city, the last.fm
api indicates the number of unique listeners that each of that
city   s top 500 artists had. thus, for each week we have a
matrix; in this matrix every city is a row vector with 500 non-
zero elements, and each column represents an artist. because
not all cities have the same top 500 artists, the matrix has
more than 500 columns and a large number of zero-valued
elements. thus, a non-zero entry in this matrix at position
i, j is a positive integer indicating the number of unique users
from city i who listened to artist j that week. zero-valued
entries indicate that the artist had either no listeners, or that
it was not among the 500 most popular artists in the city that
week. at the time of data collection in late 2011, these charts
were available for 153 weeks.

because not all

last.fm users are active every week, a
single week   s chart can be thought of as a sample of listening
preferences among last.fm users. in cities that have relatively
few users, the variance associated with this sample becomes
large, indicating noise. we    nd that we can reduce this noise
by summing up the matrices associated with four consecutive
weeks together. this effectively increases the sample size for
each entry in the city-artist matrix described above. for this
reason, in all of the analysis below, we aggregate our data
using a    sliding window    where the width of the window is
four weeks, and the window slides in one-week steps. we call
the matrices associated with these four-week periods listen
matrices.
normalizing listen matrices. consider the toy example
presented in    g. 2(a). in this scenario, we imagine there are
only two artists, radiohead and coldplay, and two cities, los
angeles and seattle. we want to compare how similar los
angeles    preferences are to seattle   s. in one sense, they are
similar: each city listens to roughly 50% more radiohead
than coldplay. however, if we look at the absolute number
of listens in each city, the cities are far apart simply because
los angeles is much larger than seattle.

in order to compare the similarities of cities regardless
of their size (i.e., last.fm activity level), we always perform
euclidean id172 on the rows of each listen matrix,
which ensures that each row vector (i.e., each city   s listening
preference) has the same length. in other words, the euclidean
id172 puts the row vectors of each listen matrix on
the unit circle, as in    g. 2(b). this type of id172 is
standard in the    eld of information retrieval [17].
genres.

in the analysis below,

it will be important

to

1according to last.fm   s blog post at http://blog.last.fm/2012/01/16/building-

best-of-2011

distinguish between various genres of music. in order to
determine which genres exist, and which artists belong to each
genre, we use last.fm   s tag api. examples of tags include
rock, seen live, alternative, indie, electronic, and pop (these
are the 6 most popular tags). for each tag, the last.fm api also
indicates the one thousand most popular artists that belong to
that tag. we construct the listen matrix associated with a given
tag by including only those columns which represent artists
included in the list of top thousand artists for that tag. we will
subsequently refer to the term    tag    by the more conventional
term    genre   . some tags, e.g.    seen live    are clearly not genres
- these are not considered in the analysis presented here.
missing data.
inspection of the data indicates that fourteen
of the weeks are outliers in the sense that around the world,
little if any music was listened to. we believe that during
these weeks the last.fm scrobbling service was not operating as
usual. in the analysis below, we omitted from all measurements
the contributions that involved one or more of the missing
weeks.

iii. music knows no borders, yet geographic

clusters are strong

are the listening preferences of last.fm users across the
world similar, or do they form coherent clusters? the existence
of global superstars might lead one to believe that largely
similar music is listened to across the world;
in
a comprehensive study of the top-40 music charts of 22
countries, ferreira and waldfogel found that 31 artists artists
appeared simultaneously on at least 18 countries in one year
[18]. of these 31 artists, 23 were us american. that such a
small set of artists appeared on charts all around the world
suggests a high degree of homogeneity around the world.

indeed,

to construct

despite this appearance of global homogeneity, in this sec-
tion, we present results which indicate that there are clusters
of cities that have their own idiosyncratic preferences, and
that these clusters are closely related to geographic distance,
nationality, and language.
producing a hierarchical id91.
the
dendrogram shown in    g. 1, we performed average linkage
id91 (an agglomerative id91 algorithm) on a dis-
tance matrix d of the cities, a square matrix where each entry
di,j is the euclidean distance between city i and j. instead
of constructing the dendrogram based on just a single listen
matrix, we summed together the distance matrices associated
with the all of the listen matrices in our dataset. the colored
clusters are the result of taking a    at cut to the dendrogram
at a height which we chose manually. for an overview of this
type of hierarchical id91, as well as a description of the
software package we used, see [19].
discussion.
if we look at the lowest level structure of the
dendrogram   i.e., the pairs of cities that are most similar to
each other   we observe that every pair involves two cities of the
same nationality. many of these pairs are composed of cities
that are, in the context of their countries, geographically close

to each other: cincinnati and columbus, portland and seattle,
berlin and dresden, edmonton and calgary, lausanne and
geneva, gijon and oviedo, birmingham and manchester, and
edinburgh and glasgow. however, there are a few noteworthy
exceptions to this trend: new york city and and san francisco,
milan and rome, munich and hamburg. these pairs of cities
are close in the dendrogram indicating high relative similarity.
this is surprising because in each case both cities in the pair
have many geographically nearer cities which would seem to
be more likely candidates for most similar counterpart. for
example, san jose is geographically adjacent to san francisco,
but san francisco   s users are more similar to nyc   s.

at an intermediate level of structure in the dendrogram   the
colored clusters   we see that again, nationality dominates. in
the cases where two countries have been put into the same
cluster, such as new zealand and australia or ireland and the
united kingdom, those two countries still show separation
within their cluster. intriguingly,
the united states shows
two somewhat distinct clusters which are not geographically
coherent and are dif   cult to explain. we note only that the
usa 2 cluster appears to contain both the largest metropolitan
areas (nyc, los angeles, and chicago), as well as several
cities known for having a large    hipster    population, which is
passionate about appearing to know much about music, and
likely to use last.fm (such as san francisco, austin, portland,
and seattle).

at the highest level of the hierarchical structure, we observe
how the colored clusters are related to each other. language
seems to be the key here; anglophone clusters are closely
related, as are the spanish-speaking and german-speaking
clusters. it is interesting to see that switzerland, including its
french-speaking cities, are most closely related to german
speaking countries. chilean cities    musical preferences are
more similar to mexican cities than to brazilian cities. we
note that although in this dendrogram canada appears to be
more similar to n. zealand and australia than to the usa,
this tendency was not very robust: if we ran the id91 on
a subset of only more active cities, then it was usually more
similar to the us cities. on the other hand, the other features
we have described here were robust in this sense.

iv. methodology: detecting leaders and

followers

to detect leader-follower pairs, we adapt the methodology
of nagy et al. [12], which is based on    nding lagged corre-
lations, and was previously applied to    nding leadership in
pigeon    ocks. in    g. 2, we display some of the key steps of
the method we employ to    nd leaders and followers. here
we show made-up data for explanation purposes: we depict a
scenario with just two cities, los angeles (la) and seattle,
and two artists. we are interested in determining whether

    la follows seattle (in this case we draw the directed

edge la     seattle)
    seattle follows la (seattle     la), or
    neither leads the other (no edge)

fig. 1.
hierarchical id91 based on average linkage id91 of
euclidean distances of cities in the normalized listen matrices. (zoom in
electronic version to view city names.)

shizuokahiroshimasendaikobefukuokasapporonagoyakyototokyoosakataipeiguangzhoubeijingshanghaiadanaantalyabursaistanbulankaraszczecinkatowicewarsawcracowpenzaufaminskmoscowsaintpetersburgfrankfurthelsinkioslobergenume  uppsalastockholmmalm  link  pingv  ster  sbelohorizontebras  liaportoalegres  opaulocuritibasalvadorrecifebel  mmanausneworleansnewyorksanfranciscoaustinseattleportlandpittsburghrichmondatlantabaltimoresanjoselosangelessandiegobostonchicagophiladelphianashvilledenverminneapolismemphisdetroitelpasowestpalmbeachmiamisyracusejacksonvillevirginiabeachhoustonsacramentophoenixlasvegaslouisvilleindianapolisclevelandmilwaukeecolumbuscincinnatirochesterbuffaloorlandotampalittlerockpensacoladublinaberdeenexeternewportplymouthbelfastlondonedinburghglasgowsouthamptonliverpoolnottinghambrightonmanchesterbirminghambristolleedscardiffquebecsaskatoonmontrealhalifaxvancouvertorontoottawawinnipegcalgaryedmontonnewcastleadelaidesydneymelbournechristchurchaucklandwellingtonflorencenaplesgenoapalermobolognaturinmilanromesalzburgrostockmagdeburgbremenstuttgarthamburgmunichberlindresdeninnsbrucklinzviennagrazwinterthurbaselgenevalausannecopenhagennicenancygrenoblemarseillemontpellierlillestrasbourgrennesbordeauxnantestoulouseparislyonlisbonportoli  gebrusselsantwerpbilbaosalamancamurciagranadazaragozaacoru  aalicantebarcelonamadridvalenciaoviedogij  nsantiagovalpara  somexicalibogot  tijuanam  ridapueblaguadalajaramonterreymexicospainbelgiumportugalfranceaustriagermanyitalyn. zealand +australiacanadausa 1usa 2brazilnorwayrussiapolandchinajapanturkeychileuk + irelandswedenif an edge exists, we would also like to assign a weight
to that edge which determines the strength of the leader-
follower relationship. we now explain how we decide on the
relationship type and weight.
calculating lagged correlations. we begin by performing
euclidean id172 on each city   s listening frequency
vector in every listen matrix, as previously described in
section ii and visualized in the change from    g. 2(a) to
   g. 2(b). each of the blue arrows in    g. 2(b) is a velocity
vseattle(t, t + 1) that represents the change that takes place
in the listening habits of seattle from one month t to the
next month t + 1. for example, to    nd seattle   s velocity from
june to july vseattle(june, july), we subtract seattle   s row
in the normalized listen matrix for time-step june from the
corresponding row from the matrix for july.

as mentioned in section ii, each listen matrix is based on
a four-week window of last.fm data, which means that to
calculate one of these velocities, we use eight consecutive
weeks (two four-week windows). we successively slide this
eight week period one week forward in time, giving us one
velocity associated with each slide. we are left with a sequence
of velocities for each city.

to measure whether seattle follows la, we measure the
similarity of each of seattle   s velocities with la   s velocities
from one month earlier, as in the top half of    g. 2(c). we
measure the similarity between two velocities using the dot
product (as in [12]). we call the average of these lagged
similarities the correlation of la   s velocities with seattle   s
lagged velocities, where the lag size is one month, and we
refer to this measure as c.

in the example displayed in    g. 2, the lag size is    xed at
one month. however, there is no reason to believe that this
lag size should be the same for all dyads and it would be
arbitrary to settle on one month. along the lines of nagy et
al., for each dyad, we consider lag sizes of 1-5 weeks, and
we choose the one which yields the largest correlation. we
therefore let the data decide how this parameter ought to be
set. in practice the lag size which maximizes the correlation
tends to be one week, however there are also cases where the
strongest correlation is at four or    ve weeks (see blue edges
in    g. 3)     in these cases the correlation tends to be weak.
deciding which edges to accept. up to now, the methodology
described in this section closely resembles the one used by
nagy et al. however, we    nd it necessary to modify their
   nal two steps, which determine

(1) whether a correlation is strong enough to be accepted
(2) the direction the relationship if one exists.

for step (1), nagy et al. accept only those leader-follower
relationships which have a correlation above some threshold,
either 0.5 or 0.9. this criterion is inappropriate in our case
because the magnitude of the dot products are very small, on
the order of 0.01 to 0.001. they are much smaller because,
due to the way we normalize data, cities mostly stand still and
move only slightly from week to week; furthermore we are in
a much higher dimensional space. for these reasons it is hard

fig. 2. calculating lagged correlations (here shown with imaginary data
for ease of explanation). (a) first, for each city, we collect from last.fm the
number of times that each artist was listened to in a given month. (b) to
be able to compare cities with different levels of last.fm activity, we next
normalize the number of listens in each city by that city   s euclidean norm.
we focus on the velocity (change in the normalized artist popularity) from
the previous month i     1 to the current month i, denoted as vj (i     1, i) for
city j, and depicted by the arrows in (b). (c) for each pair of cities (j, k),
we measure the similarity of vj (i     1, i) and vk(i     2, i     1) by taking the
dot product of these velocities. this yields a list of similarities over time; we
de   ne the lagged correlation to be the mean of these dot products. in this toy
example, it should be clear from glancing at the trajectories of seattle and la
that la is following seattle, and not the other way; the correlation measure
presented here successfully indicates this tendency.

100001500020000250003000035000radioheadlistens800010000120001400016000180002000022000coldplaylistensaprmayjunjulaugaprmayjunjulaugal.a.seattle0.780.800.820.840.860.880.90euclid.normalizedradiohead0.450.500.550.60euclid.normalizedcoldplayv(apr,may)v(may,jun)v(jun,jul)v(jul,aug)v(apr,may)v(may,jun)v(jun,jul)v(jul,aug)blav(apr,may)seat.v(may,jun)   0.036lav(may,jun)seat.v(jun,jul)   0.383lav(jun,jul)seat.v(jul,aug)0.210c=mean()=   0.070ccorrelationofla   svelocities&seattle   slaggedvelocitiesseat.v(apr,may)lav(may,jun)0.245seat.v(may,jun)lav(jun,jul)0.193seat.v(jun,jul)lav(jul,aug)0.436c=mean()=0.291correlationofseattle   svelocities&la   slaggedvelocities(a) all music

(b) indie music

(c) hip hop

fig. 3. leader-follower network for the twenty most active cities in two canada and the usa. within each diagram, the height of the nodes corresponds to
their id95, their size to their weighted in-degree. edge width is determined by the correlation, as de   ned in section iv. gray edges have a lag time of
1, 2, or 3 weeks, blue edges have a lag time of 4 or 5 weeks.

to pick a threshold for the lowest admissible correlation size.
instead, we perform one sample t-test on the distribution of dot
products. if we cannot reject the hypothesis that the the mean
of the distribution equals zero, then we say no leader-follower
relationship exists.

it could be the case for a dyad i, j that after performing
step (1), i appears to follow j and j appears to follow i.
while in this case nagy et al. simply choose the direction
that is larger (even if it is just marginally larger), we argue
that in this situation perhaps neither city is really leading they
other, and instead they are moving together. to make sure
there is a clear direction to the leader-follower relationship, we
perform a second t-test to make sure that the two correlations
(which are means of dot products) are not equal; here we
use a two-sided, paired t-test. if a one correlation is larger,
then we accept the leader-follower pair associated with that
correlation as a directed edge, otherwise we say no leader-
follower relationship exists.

in the following results, we set p = 0.01 for all t-tests. we
note that our use of t-tests here is heuristic; for example, we
do not test to make sure that the distribution of dot products
is gaussian (although they do appear reasonably symmetric
and we obtained qualitatively the same results when outliers
were removed), and we do not correct for our testing of
multiple hypotheses. we use the t-tests as a selection criterion
to identify the more pronounced leader-follower relationships,

not because we rely on their validity in a statistical sense.

v. results: the geographic flow of music

in the previous section, we described how we determine
whether a leader-follower relationship exists between two
nodes. in each study displayed in    g. 3, we take a subset of
cities,    nd all follower-relationships among them, and plot the
resulting network. the edges point from followers to leaders
and are weighted by the lagged correlation, as de   ned above.
to create the networks in    g. 3, we    rst choose a genre of
music. while it is possible to create a network showing the
   ow of all genres of music, as we have done in    g. 3a and
   g. 4a, we    nd this has a disadvantage: depending upon the
genre that one considers, contradictory relationships may exist.
for example, if we consider hip hop music as in    g. 3c, then
we see that atlanta has the most prominent position, whereas
if we consider indie music as in    g. 3b, atlanta has one of the
least prominent positions. by considering all genres at once as
in    g. 3a, these trends get washed out by the multi-dimensional
aspect that genre brings to the data.

in    g. 3, we show the leader-follower relationships between
20 cities in the usa and canada with the largest number
of active last.fm users. we choose this subset because of the
noise associated with small cities that have insuf   cient data,
and because due to space constraints it is hard to visualize
large networks. the most signi   cant property visible in these

(a) all music

(b) indie music

fig. 4. leader-follower network for the most active cities in western europe. sizes, positions, and colors as in    g. 3. zoom-able online.

leader-follower networks have few cycles

table i

region

genre

% edge weight removed

to make acyclic

n. america

europe

all
indie
hip hop
rock
classic rock

all
indie
hip hop
rock
classic rock

0.0%
1.8%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

0.0%
0.0%
2.2%
0.0%
0.0%

graphs is that they are nearly acyclic; for example,    g. 3a has
no edges, and by removing only three edges from    g. 3b,
the graph becomes acyclic. in table i, we show that
this
property holds true for the leader-follower networks created
from diverse geographic regions and genres. to calculate
the measure displayed in that table, we    rst computed the
feedback arc (edge) set, which is the smallest set of edges
that, when removed from a graph, make the graph acyclic.
we measured the percent of the graph   s total weight in the
feedback arc set.

we believe that this lack of cycles is not an artifact of
our methodology, which focuses only on dyads and does not
consider the network as a whole. rather, we believe that the

lack of cycles is inherent in the data itself, indicating a clear
direction in the    ow of music preferences. others have argued
that a system with a strong leadership hierarchy ought to be
nearly acyclic [12], [13] so the lack of cycles in our networks
is a clear validation of the methodology.

that

is apparent

there are many centrality measures that could be used
as criteria for deciding which cities are the most cutting
edge and which are laggards. the networks in    gs. 3 and 4
display two of these centrality measures: their height re   ects
their id95, which seems appropriate because id95
is designed to rank importance of nodes on weighted, directed
networks on which a dynamic process takes place [20]. the
area taken up by each node re   ects its weighted in-degree.
while it
the id95 and weighted in-
degree are highly correlated, in some cases they order nodes
differently   for example, in    g. 3c, atlanta has the largest
id95, but chicago has the largest weighted in-degree.
these visualizations were created using the    status    layout
algorithm of the network visualization software visone [21].
for us, the most surprising features of    g. 3 are (1) the
middle ranking positions of some of the largest cities, such
as nyc and la in    g. 3a and nyc and chicago in    g. 3b
and (2) the prominent position of canadian cities, especially
in    g. 3b. while montreal is known for having produced
some popular indie bands (such as arcade fire and wolf
parade), this does not necessarily mean that last.fm listeners
from montreal would be generally leaders in their taste in
indie music; in any case, new york city is presumably home

to more prominent indie artists than montreal.

while the diagrams in    g. 3 display the leader-follower
relations for a relatively homogeneous cultural region, those
in    g. 4 display these relations in europe, a region more
culturally and linguistically diverse. it is interesting to note that
many of the most heavily weighted edges are between cities
in different countries and which speak different languages. for
example, london, birmingham, brighton, and bristol, have a
much stronger follower relationship with oslo and stockholm
than with each other (london   s unremarkable position is also
noteworthy). similarly, cracow and warsaw do not follow
each other, rather their strongest edges point to german and
scandinavian cities.

along the lines of this last observation, it is noteworthy
that in general many of the edges with the largest weights
connect cities which were not similar to each other in the
hierarchical id91 in    g. 1. for example, the canadian
cities are located far away from the us cities in that id91,
yet here there is a strong    ow from the former to the latter.
although pairs of cities such as portland and or nyc and
san francisco are very similar in the id91, they are
connected in    g. 3b by only weak edges. one speculative
explanation is that cities which have very similar listening
habits are largely synchronized with each other, and therefore
there is little potential for novel information to    ow between
them. for example, the leading city in    g. 3b, montreal, is
unique in that the language spoken by the majority is not
english but french, a difference which may provide it with
novel information.

vi. hypothesis: large cities are leaders

as noted in the introduction, there is currently much excite-
ment surrounding the observation that productivity, ef   ciency,
and innovation all scale super-linearly with the size of a city.
for an accessible, high-level overview of this discussion, see
[14]; for extensive empirical evidence for the universality
of this relationship, see [15]; and for a proposed causal
mechanism, see [16].

this work makes many fascinating empirical observations
as well as an interesting comparison between organisms and
cities; here we summarize only a few main points. the    rst is
that the total productivity of a city p is super-linear. in data
collected so far, a power-law relationship appears to provide
a reasonable    t, so that total production in an n person city
is well approximated by the relationship p (n ) = n   , where
       1.2. [15] this means, for example, that a person living
in cities with 10 million inhabitants is roughly 2.5 times as
productive (in terms of wealth production, creativity, patents,
and other measures) as an individual living in a city with only
100 thousand inhabitants. consumption of water, gasoline, or
electricity appear to have a linear relationship, so people in
smaller and larger cities consume the same amounts. certain
types of infrastructural needs, such as the number of gasoline
stations, the meters of electric cabling installed, and road
surface area, increase sub-linearly, with the scaling exponent
       0.8, indicating economies of scale.

relationship between a city   s population size and status in

table ii

network

spearman rank correlation
of centrality & population

genre

id95

in-degree

all
indie
rock
hip hop

0.34
0.61
0.21
0.38

0.18
0.61
0.26
0.28

% edge weight where

leader larger

55%
61%
63%
59%

bettencourt et al., the authors of [15], also suggest that
the very pace of life in large cities is faster, and arbesman
et al. [16] propose that productivity gains may be attributed
to the increased id203 of ties between diverse groups,
which helps information spread quickly. if the pace of life
in larger cities were faster, and the spread of information
more ef   cient, then it would be reasonable to expect that
larger cities would lead smaller ones in adopting fresh music
and abandoning stale music. here we test this hypothesis
by measuring whether city size is positively and strongly
correlated with a position of leadership in the network    ow
diagrams presented in section v.

bettencourt et al. are careful to treat each    national urban
system    separately, because otherwise their measurements
might be confounded by the fact that different countries have
economies at different levels of development. thus, they do
not expect that all cities around the globe which are of the
same size should have the same level of production; rather,
they expect this only within a tightly integrated economic
region. (they do however argue that the same scaling exponent
exists in every nation.) the north american cities in    g. 3
belong to a tightly integrated economic area at a similar level
of development, so we test this hypothesis on that set of
cities. for us population sizes, we use the us metropolitan
statistical areas, as bettencourt et al. (although we use the
newer data from 2010), for canadian population sizes we use
the census metropolitan areas from 2011.

in table ii we display some measures of the relationship
between the population size of a city and its leadership status
in the diagrams depicted in    g. 3. the second and third
columns display the spearman   s rank correlation of population
size and id95, and population size and the weighted in-
degree, respectively. the    nal column shows, for all edges, the
percentage of the total weight that comes from edges where
the larger city is the leader.

while these correlations between city size and leadership
position are positive, most of these relationships are quite weak
when compared with those observed in the above-mentioned
work on superlinearity of cities. we were surprised that they
were not stronger. in most genres, the spearman correlation
coef   cients are smaller than we expected, and the percentage
of edge weight that comes from edges where small cities are
led by larger cities is not very far from 50%. additionally,
although there are some cities in north america which dwarf

references

[1] p. lazarsfeld, b. berelson, and h. gaudet, the people   s choice. how the
voter makes up his mind in a presidential campaign [1944]. columbia
university press, 1948.

[2] j. coleman, e. katz, and h. menzel,    the diffusion of an innovation
among physicians,    sociometry, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 253   270, 1957.
[online]. available: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2785979

[3] j. moreno,    who shall survive?, rev. ed,    beacon, ny: beacon house,

1953.

[4] l. festinger, s. schachter, and k. back, social pressures in informal

groups: a study of human factors in housing. harper, 1950.

[5] e. katz,    the two-step flow of communication: an up-to-
date report on an hypothesis,    the public opinion quarterly,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 61     78, 1957.
[online]. available: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/2746790

[6] m. granovetter,    the strength of weak ties,    american journal of

sociology, pp. 1360   1380, 1973.

[7] e. bakshy, i. rosenn, c. marlow, and l. adamic,    the role of social
networks in information diffusion,    arxiv preprint arxiv:1201.4145,
2012.

[8] d. liben-nowell and j. kleinberg,    tracing information    ow on a global
scale using internet chain-letter data.    proceedings of
the national
academy of sciences of the united states of america, vol. 105, no. 12,
pp. 4633   8, mar. 2008.

[9] j. leskovec and e. horvitz,    planetary-scale views on a large
instant-messaging network,    in proceeding of the 17th international
conference on world wide web. acm, 2008, pp. 915   924. [online].
available: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1367497.1367620

[10] d. gruhl, r. guha, d. liben-nowell, and a. tomkins,    information
diffusion through blogspace,    in proceedings of the 13th international
conference on world wide web. acm, 2004, pp. 491   501.

[11] j. leskovec, l. backstrom, and j. kleinberg,    meme-tracking and the
dynamics of the news cycle,    in proceedings of the 15th acm sigkdd
international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining.
acm new york, ny, usa, 2009, pp. 497   506.

[12] m. nagy, z. akos, d. biro, and t. vicsek,    hierarchical group dynamics
in pigeon    ocks.    nature, vol. 464, no. 7290, pp. 890   3, apr. 2010.
[online]. available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20376149

[13] e. mones, l. vicsek, and t. vicsek,    hierarchy measure for complex

networks,    arxiv preprint arxiv:1202.0191, 2012.

[14] l. bettencourt and g. west,    bigger cities do more with less,    scienti   c

american, vol. 305, no. 3, pp. 52   53, 2011.

[15] l. bettencourt, j. lobo, d. helbing, c. k  hnert, and g. west,    growth,
innovation, scaling, and the pace of life in cities,    proceedings of the
national academy of sciences, vol. 104, no. 17, p. 7301, 2007.

[16] s. arbesman, j. m. kleinberg, and s. h. strogatz,    superlinear
scaling for innovation in cities,    phys. rev. e, vol. 79, p. 016115, jan
2009. [online]. available: http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/physreve.79.
016115

[17] c. manning, p. raghavan, and h. schutze, introduction to information

retrieval. cambridge university press cambridge, 2008, vol. 1.

[18] f. ferreira and j. waldfogel,    pop internationalism: has a half century
of world music trade displaced local culture?    national bureau of
economic research, tech. rep., 2010.

[19] d. m  llner,    modern hierarchical, agglomerative id91 algorithms,   
arxiv, p. 29, sep. 2011. [online]. available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.
2378

[20] l. page, s. brin, r. motwani, and t. winograd,    the id95 citation

ranking: bringing order to the web.    1999.

[21] u. brandes and d. wagner,    analysis and visualization of social

networks,    graph drawing software, pp. 321   340, 2004.

most of the other large cities (such as nyc, with 18.9 million
residents, and la with 12.8 million), in many cases these cities
do not occupy prominent positions in    g. 3.

indie music is an exception   here the correlation between
leadership and city size is quite large. we are not sure why
this is the case   perhaps this genre is quicker moving or more
urban than the others (although presumably hip hop is also
quite an urban genre).

the work on scaling laws in cities which we have summa-
rized in this section is signi   cant because it appears to have
uncovered a universal law in the social sciences, one which
can make quantitative predictions. our point here is not to
claim that our results contradict this law. the preliminary
results presented in this paper suggest that, in the speci   c
context of being cutting edge in music, cities are idiosyncratic.
larger cities are not predictably and generally ahead of smaller
cities. in other words, a city is more than the number of its
inhabitants, it might lead the trends in one genre while lagging
them in another.

vii. discussion and future work

one major question hangs over the results presented above:
why should we believe that our models of    ow, as pictured in
the network diagrams displayed in this paper, are valid? on
the one hand, two aspects of our methodology lend the results
credibility: that each leader-follower relationship underwent a
t-test, and that when all of the leader-follower relationships
were put together into a graph, they formed directed acyclic
graphs, which indicate a direction of    ow in a strict sense. for
these two reasons, our method distinguishes itself from other
unsupervised methods   such as many id91 methods   
which are problematic because they return results regardless
of whether there is structure in the underlying data. in other
words, if we shuf   e our data around so that random noise
dominates any signal of leader-follower relationships, our
method no longer detects leader-follower relationships.

on the other hand, certain doubts remain, and we should
stress that our results re   ect a work in progress. for example, a
relationship can be statistically signi   cant but at the same time
have a very small magnitude. we would be more con   dent of
our results if we could demonstrate that the model that we
create is meaningfully predictive. that is, given our model of
leader-follower relationships among cities, and given a record
of past listening behavior, we should be able to predict the
changes in listening behavior that will occur in the near-term
future better than a reasonable baseline predictor. we have not
yet demonstrated that our models have this predictive power,
although we plan to attempt this validation in future work.

acknowledgment

this material is based upon works supported by the science
foundation ireland under grant no. 08/src/i1407: clique:
graph & network analysis cluster.

