towards real-time summarization of scheduled events

from twitter streams    

arkaitz zubiaga
queens college

city university of new york

new york, ny, usa

arkaitz.zubiaga@qc.cuny.edu

damiano spina

nlp&ir group

etsi inform  tica uned

madrid, spain

damiano@lsi.uned.es

2
1
0
2

 
r
p
a
7
1

 

 
 
]

r

i
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
3
7
3

.

4
0
2
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

enrique amig  
nlp&ir group

etsi inform  tica uned

madrid, spain

enrique@lsi.uned.es

julio gonzalo
nlp&ir group

etsi inform  tica uned

madrid, spain

julio@lsi.uned.es

abstract
this paper explores the real-time summarization of sched-
uled events such as soccer games from torrential    ows of
twitter streams. we propose and evaluate an approach
that substantially shrinks the stream of tweets in real-time,
and consists of two steps: (i) sub-id37, which
determines if something new has occurred, and (ii) tweet se-
lection, which picks a representative tweet to describe each
sub-event. we compare the summaries generated in three
languages for all the soccer games in copa america 2011
to reference live reports o   ered by yahoo! sports journal-
ists. we show that simple text analysis methods which do
not involve external knowledge lead to summaries that cover
84% of the sub-events on average, and 100% of key types of
sub-events (such as goals in soccer). our approach should
be straightforwardly applicable to other kinds of scheduled
events such as other sports, award ceremonies, keynote talks,
tv shows, etc.

categories and subject descriptors
h.3.3 [information storage and retrieval]:
informa-
tion search and retrieval; h.1.2 [models and principles]:
user/machine systems   human information processing

general terms
experimentation

keywords
twitter, real-time, events, summarization

   the present paper gives more technical and experimental

details about the work published as a poster at ht   2012 [8].

introduction

1.
twitter1 has gained widespread popularity as a microblog-
ging site where users share short messages (tweets). twitter
users not only tweet about their personal issues or nearby
events, but also about news and events of interest to some
community [5]. twitter has become a powerful tool to stay
tuned to current a   airs.
it is known that, in particular,
twitter users exhaustively share messages about (all kinds
of) events they are following live, occasionally giving rise to
related trending topics [9].

the community of users live tweeting about a given event
generates rich contents describing sub-events that occur dur-
ing an event (e.g., goals, red cards or penalties in a soccer
game). all those users share valuable information provid-
ing live coverage of events [1]. however, this overwhelm-
ing amount of information makes di   cult for the user: (i)
to follow the full stream while    nding out about new sub-
events, and (ii) to retrieve from twitter the main, summa-
rized information about which are the key things happening
at the event.
in the context of exploring the potential of
twitter as a means to follow an event, we address the (yet
largely unexplored) task of summarizing twitter contents
by providing the user with a summed up stream that de-
scribes the key sub-events. we propose a two-step process
for the real-time summarization of events    sub-event detec-
tion and tweet selection   , and analyze and evaluate di   erent
approaches for each of these two steps. we    nd that twit-
ter provides an outstanding means for detailed tracking of
events, and present an approach that accurately summa-
rizes streams to help the user    nd out what is happening
throughout an event. we perform experiments on scheduled
events, where the start time is known. by comparing di   er-
ent summarization approaches, we    nd that learning from
the information seen before throughout the event is really
helpful both to determine if a sub-event occurred, and to
select a tweet that represents it.

to the best of our knowledge, our work is the    rst to provide
an approach to generate real-time summaries of events from
twitter streams without making use of external knowledge.

1http://twitter.com/

thus, our approach might be straightforwardly applied to
other kinds of scheduled events without requiring additional
knowledge.

2. dataset
we study the case of tweets sent during the games of a soc-
cer competition. sports events are a good choice to explore
for summarization purposes, because they are usually re-
ported live by journalists, providing a reference to compare
with. we set out to explore the copa america 2011 cham-
pionship, which took place from july 1st to 24th, 2011, in
argentina, where 26 soccer games were played. choosing
an international competition with a wide reach enables to
gather and summarize tweets in di   erent languages. the
o   cial start times for the games were announced in advance
by the organization.

during the period of the copa america, we gathered all the
tweets that contained any of #ca2011, #copaamerica, and
#copaamerica2011, which were set to be the o   cial twitter
hashtags for the competition. for the 24 days of collec-
tion, we retrieved 1,425,858 unique tweets sent by 290,716
di   erent users. these tweets are written in 30 di   erent lan-
guages, with a majority of 76.2% in spanish, 7.8% in por-
tuguese, and 6.2% in english. the tweeting activity of the
games considerably varies, from 11k tweets for the least-
active game, to 74k for the most-active one, with an average
of 32k tweets per game.

in order to de   ne a reference for evaluation, we collected
the live reports for all the games given by yahoo! sports2.
these reports include the annotations of the most relevant
sub-events throughout a game. 7 types of annotations are
included: goals (54 were found for the 26 games), penalties
(2), red cards (12), disallowed goals (10), game starts (26),
ends (26), and stops and resumptions (63). on average,
each game comprises 7.42 annotations. each of these anno-
tations includes the minute when it happened. we manu-
ally annotated the beginning of each game in the twitter
streams, so that we could infer the timestamp of each anno-
tation from those minutes. the annotations do not provide
speci   c times with seconds, and the actual timestamp may
vary slightly. we have considered these di   erences for the
evaluation process.

3. real-time event summarization
we de   ne real-time event summarization as the task that
provides new information about an event every time a rel-
evant sub-event occurs. to tackle the summarization task,
we de   ne a two-step process that enables to report infor-
mation about new sub-events in di   erent languages. the
   rst step is to identify at all times whether or not a spe-
ci   c sub-event occurred in the last few seconds. the output
will be a boolean value determining if something relevant
occurred; if so, the second step is to choose a representative
tweet that describes the sub-event in the language preferred
by the user. the aggregation of these two processes will in
turn provide a set of tweets as a summary of the game (see
figure 1).

2 http://uk.eurosport.yahoo.com/football/
copa-america/fixtures-results/

figure 1: two-step process for real-time event sum-
marization.

3.1 first step: sub-id37
the    rst part of the event summarization system corre-
sponds to the sub-id37. note that, being a real-
time sub-id37, the system has to determine at
all times whether or not a relevant sub-event has occurred,
clueless of how the stream will continue to evolve. before
the beginning of an event, the system is provided with the
time that it starts, as scheduled in advance, so the system
knows when to start looking for new sub-events. with the
goal of developing a real-time sub-id37 method,
we rely on the fact that relevant sub-events trigger a mas-
sive tweeting activity of the community. we assume that
the more important a sub-event is, the more users will tweet
about it almost immediately. this is re   ected as peaks in
the histogram of tweeting rates (see figure 2 for an example
of a game in our dataset). in the process of detecting sub-
events, we aim to compare 2 di   erent ideas: (i) considering
only sudden increase with respect to the recent tweeting ac-
tivity, and (ii) considering also all the previous activity seen
during a game, so that the system learns from the evolution
of the audience. we compare the following two methods
that rely on these 2 ideas:

1. increase: this approach was introduced by zhao et
al. [7]. it considers that an important sub-event will
be re   ected as a sudden increase in the tweeting rate.
for time periods de   ned at 10, 20, 30 and 60 seconds,
this method checks if the tweeting rate increases by at
least 1.7 from the previous time frame for any of those
periods. if the increase actually occurred, it is consid-
ered that a sub-event occurred. a potential drawback
of this method is that not only outstanding tweeting
rates would be reported as sub-events, but also low
rates that are preceded by even lower rates.

2. outliers: we introduce an outlier-based approach that
relies on whether the tweeting rate for a given time
frame stands out from the regular tweeting rate seen
so far during the event (not only from the previous
time frame). we set the time period at 60 seconds
for this approach. 15 minutes before the game starts,
the system begins to learn from the tweeting rates,
to    nd out what is the approximate audience of the
event. when the start time approaches, the system be-
gins with the sub-id37 process. the system
considers that a sub-event occurred when the tweeting
rate represents an outlier as compared to the activity
seen before. speci   cally, if the tweeting rate is above

summarysub-id37tweet selectionreal-timetweets streamtweettweettweet90% of all the previously seen tweeting rates, the cur-
rent time frame will be reported as a sub-event. this
threshold has been set a priori and without optimiza-
tion. the outlier-based method incrementally learns
while the game advances, comparing the current tweet-
ing rate to all the rates seen previously. di   erent from
the increase-based approach, our method presents the
advantages that it considers the speci   c audience of
an event, and that consecutive sub-events can also be
detected if the tweeting rate remains constant without
increase. accordingly, this method will not consider
that a sub-event occurred for low tweeting rates pre-
ceded by even lower rates, as opposed to the increase-
based approach.

figure 2: sample histogram of tweeting rates for a
soccer game (argentina vs uruguay), where several
peaks can be seen.

since the annotations on the reference are limited to min-
utes, we round down the outputs of the systems to match
the reference. also, the timestamps annotated for the ref-
erence are not entirely precise, and therefore we accept as a
correct guess an automatic sub-id37 that di   ers
by at most one minute from the reference.

this evaluation method enables us to compare the two sys-
tems to infer which of them performs best. table 1 shows the
precision (p), recall (r) and f-measure (f1) of the automat-
ically detected sub-events with respect to the reference, as
well as the average number of sub-events detected per game
(#). our outliers approach clearly outperforms the baseline,
improving both precision (75.8% improvement) and recall
(3.7%) for an overall 40% gain in f1. at the same time, the
compression rate for the outliers approach almost doubles
that of the baseline (56.4%). from the average of 32k tweets
sent per game, the summarization to 25.6 tweets represents
a drastic reduction to only 0.079% of the total. keeping the
number of sub-events small while e   ectiveness improves is
important for a summarization system in order to provide
a concise and accurate summary. the outperformance of
the outlier-based approach shows the importance of taking
into account the audience of a speci   c game, as well as the
helpfulness of learning from previous activity throughout a
game.

increase
outliers

p

0.29
0.51

r
0.81
0.84

f1
0.41
0.63

#
45.4
25.6

table 1: evaluation of sub-id37 ap-
proaches.

3.2 second step: tweet selection
the second and    nal part of the summarization system is the
tweet selection. this second step is only activated when the
   rst step reports that a new sub-event occurred. once the
system has determined that a sub-event occurred, the tweet
selector is provided with the tweets corresponding to the
minute of the sub-event. from those tweets, the system has
to choose one as a representative tweet that describes what
occurred. this tweet must provide the main information
about the sub-event, so the user understands what occurred
and can follow the event. here we compare two tweet se-
lection methods, one relying only on information contained
within the minute of the sub-event, and another considering
the knowledge acquired during the game. we test them on
the output of the outlier-based sub-id37 approach
described above, as the approach with best performance for
the    rst step.

to select a representative tweet, we get a ranking of all the
tweets. to do so, we score each tweet with the sum of the
values of the terms that it contains. the more representative
are the terms contained in a tweet, the more representative
will be the tweet itself. to de   ne the values of the terms, we
compare two methods: (i) considering only the tweets within
the sub-event (to give highest values to terms that are used
frequently within the sub-event), and (ii) taking into account
also the tweets sent before throughout the game, so that
the system can make a di   erence from what has been the
common vocabulary during the event (to give highest values
to terms that are especially used within the minute and not
so frequently earlier during the event). we use the following
well-known approaches to implement these two ideas:

1. tf: each term is given the value of its frequency as the
number of occurrences within the minute, regardless of
its prior use.

2. kld: we use the id181 [4] (see
equation 1) to measure how frequent is a term t within
the sub-event (h), but also considering how frequent
it has been during the game until the previous minute
(g). thus, kld will give a higher weight to terms fre-
quent within the minute that were less frequent during
the game. this may allow to get rid of the common vo-
cabulary all along the game, and rather provide higher
rates to speci   c terms within the sub-event.

dkl(h(cid:107)g) = h(t) log

h(t)
g(t)

(1)

with these two approaches, the sum of values for terms con-
tained in each tweet results in a weight for each tweet. with

time elapsedtweet rate5001000150020002500131085400013108560001310858000131086000013108620001310864000weights given to all tweets, we create a ranking of tweets sent
during the sub-event, where the tweet with highest weight
ranks    rst. we create these rankings for each of the lan-
guages we are working on. the tweet that maximizes this
score for a given language is returned as the candidate tweet
to show in the summary in that language. the two term
weighting methods were applied to create summaries in three
di   erent languages: spanish, english, and portuguese. we
test them on the output of the outlier-based sub-event de-
tection approach described above, as the approach with best
performance for the    rst step. thus, we got six summaries
for each game, i.e., tf and kld-based summaries for the
three languages. these six summaries were manually eval-
uated by comparing them to the reference. table 2 shows
some tweets included in the kld-based summary in english.

in the manual evaluation process, each tweet in a system
summary is classi   ed as correct if it can be associated to a
sub-event in the reference and is descriptive enough (note
that there might be more than one correct tweet associated
to the same sub-event). alternatively, tweets are classi   ed
as novel (they contain relevant information for the summary
which is not in the reference) or noisy. from these annota-
tions, we computed the following values for analysis and
evaluation: (i) recall, given by the ratio of sub-events in the
reference which are covered by a correct tweet in the sum-
mary; and (ii) precision, given by the ratio of correct + novel
tweets from a whole summary (note that redundancy is not
penalized by any of these measures).

goals (54)

penalties (2)

red cards (12)

disallowed
goals (10)

game starts (26)

game ends (26)

game stops &
resumptions (63)

overall

es
tf
0.98
kld 1.00
tf
1.00
kld 1.00
tf
0.75
kld 0.92
tf
0.40
kld 0.40
tf
0.73
kld 0.84
tf
1.00
kld 1.00
tf
0.62
kld 0.68
tf
0.79
kld 0.84

en
0.98
1.00
0.50
0.50
0.75
0.92
0.50
0.50
0.74
0.79
1.00
1.00
0.60
0.60
0.74
0.77

pt
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.83
1.00
0.40
0.30
0.79
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.57
0.59
0.78
0.82

table 3: recall of reported sub-events for sum-
maries in spanish (es), english (en), and portuguese
(pt).

table 3 shows recall values as the coverage of the two ap-
proaches over each type of sub-event, as well as the macro-
averaged overall values. these results corroborate that sim-
ple state-of-the-art approaches like tf and kld score out-
standing recall values. nevertheless, kld shows to be slightly
superior than tf for recall. regarding the averages of all
kinds of sub-events, recall values are near or above 80%
for all the languages.
it can also be seen that some sub-

events are much easier to detect than others. it is important
that summaries do not miss the fundamental sub-events.
for instance, all the summaries successfully reported all the
goals and all the game ends, which are probably the most
emotional moments, when users extremely coincide sharing.
however, other sub-events like game stops and resumptions,
or disallowed goals, were sometimes missed by the sum-
maries, with recall values near 50%. this shows that some
of these sub-events may not be that shocking sometimes, de-
pending on the game, so fewer users share about them, and
therefore are harder to    nd by the summarization system.
for instance, one could expect that users would not express
high emotion when a boring game with no goals stops for
half time. likewise, this shows that those sub-events are less
relevant for the community. in fact, from these summaries,
users would perfectly know when a goal is scored, when it
   nished, and what is the    nal result.

es
tf
0.79
kld 0.84

en
0.74
0.79

pt
0.79
0.83

table 4: precision of summaries in spanish (es), en-
glish (en), and portuguese (pt).

table 4 shows precision values as the ratio of useful tweets
for the three summaries generated in spanish, english and
portuguese. the results show that a simple tf approach
is relatively good for the selection of a representative tweet,
with precision values above 70% for all three languages. as
for recall values, kld does better than tf, with precision
values near or above 80%. this shows that taking advantage
of the di   erences between the current sub-event and tweets
shared before considerably helps in the tweet selection. note
also that english summaries reach 0.79 precision even if the
tweet stream is, in that case, an order of magnitude smaller
than their spanish counterpart, suggesting that the method
works well at very di   erent tweeting rates.

4. related work
id54 of events from tweets is still in
its infancy as a research    eld. some have tackled the task
in an o   ine mode, after the events were    nished. for in-
stance, hannon et al. [3] present an approach for the auto-
matic generation of video highlights for soccer games after
they    nished. they set a    xed number of sub-events that
want to be included in the highlights, and select that many
video fragments with the highest tweeting activity. others,
such as petrovi  c et al. [6], have shown the potential of twit-
ter for the detection and discovery of events from tweets.
while some have studied events after they happened, there is
very little research dealing with the real-time study of events
to provide near-immediate information. zhao et al. [7] de-
tect sub-events occurred during nfl games, using an ap-
proach based on the increase of the tweeting activity. we
set this approach as the baseline in our sub-event detec-
tion process. afterward, they apply a speci   c lexicon pro-
vided as input to identify the type of sub-event. di   erent
from this, our approach aims to be independent of the event,
providing a summarized stream instead of categorizing sub-
events. chakrabarti and punera [2] were the    rst to present
an approach    which is based on id48   

sub-event

game start

goal

goal

red card

red card

game stop
(full time)

game end

selected tweet

narrator   s comment

rt @user: uruguay-argentina. the r    o de la plata
classic. the 4th vs the 5th in the last wc. history
doesn   t matter. argentina must win. #ca2011

gol! gol! gol! de perez uruguay 1 vs argentina 0
such a quick strike and uruguay is already on top.
#copaamerica

gooooooooooooooooal argentina ! amazing pass
from messi, great positioning &    nish from higuain
!! arg 1 - 1 uru #copaamerica

red card for diego p  erez, his second yellow card,
uruguay is down to 10, i don   t know if i would have
given it. #copaam  erica2011

#ca2011 yellow for mascherano! double yellow!
adios! 10 vs 10! mascherano surrenders his captain
armband!
batista didn   t look too happy at the game going to
penalties as the tv cut to hit at ft, didn   t appear
con   dent #ca2011
uruguay beats argentina! 1-1 (5-4 penalty shoot out)!
uruguay now takes on peru in semis. #copaamerica

the referee gets the game under way

goal!! forlan   s free kick is hit deep into the box and
is    icked on by caceres. romero gets a hand on it but
can only push it into the path of perez who calmly
strokes the ball into the net.
goal!! fantastic response from argentina. messi
picks the ball up on the right wing and cuts in past
caceres. the barca man clips a ball over the top of the
defence towards higuain who heads into the bottom
corner.
you could see it coming. how stupid. another need-
less free kick conceded by perez and this time he is
given his marching order. he purposely blocks o   
gago. uruguay have really got it all to do now.
it   s ten against ten. macherano comes across and fouls
suarez. he   s given his second yellow and his subse-
quent red.

the second half is brought to an end. we will have
extra time.

argentina 4-5 - uruguay win. caceres buries
the    nal penalty into the top right-hand corner.

table 2: example of some tweets selected by the (outliers+kld) summarization system, compared with the
respective comments narrated on yahoo! sports.

for constructing real-time summaries of events from tweets.
however, their approach requires prior knowledge of similar
events, and so it is not easily applicable to previously unseen
types of events.

5. conclusions
we have presented a two-step summarization approach that,
without making use of external knowledge, identi   es rele-
vant sub-events in soccer games and selects a representative
tweet for each of them. using simple text analysis meth-
ods such as kld, our system generates real-time summaries
with precision and recall values above 80% when compared
to manually built reports. the fact that users tweet at the
same time, with overlapping vocabulary, helps not only de-
tecting that a sub-event occurs, but also selecting a repre-
sentative tweet to describe it. our study also shows that
considering all previous information seen during the event is
really helpful to this end, yielding superior results than tak-
ing into account just the most recent activity. the activity
for the soccer games studied in this work varies from 11k
to 74k tweets sent, showing that regardless of the audience
tweeting about an event, our method e   ectively reports the
key sub-events occurred during a game. finally, all of the
most relevant types of sub-events, such as goals and game
ends, are reported almost perfectly.

note that our method does not rely on any external knowl-
edge about soccer events (except for the schedule time to
begin), so it can be straightforwardly applied to other kinds
of events. as future work, we intend to evaluate the per-
formance of the method on other kinds of scheduled events
such as award ceremonies, keynote talks, other types of sport
events, product presentations, tv shows, etc.

6. acknowledgments
this work has been part-funded by the education coun-
cil of the regional government of madrid, ma2vicmr (s-
2009/tic-1542), the innovation project holopedia (tin2010-
21128-c02-01), the european community   s seventh frame-
work programme (fp7/ 2007-2013) under grant agreement
nr. 288024 (limosine project) and the spanish ministry of
education for a doctoral grant (ap2009-0507).

7. references
[1] h. becker, d. iter, m. naaman, and l. gravano.

identifying content for planned events across social
media sites. in proceedings of the    fth acm
international conference on web search and data
mining (wsdm    12), pages 533   542, 2012.

[2] d. chakrabarti and k. punera. event summarization
using tweets. in proceedings of the    fth international
aaai conference on weblogs and social media
(icwsm    11), pages 66   73. aaai, 2011.

[3] j. hannon, k. mccarthy, j. lynch, and b. smyth.

personalized and automatic social summarization of
events in video. in proceedings of the 16th international
conference on intelligent user interfaces (iui    11),
pages 335   338. acm, 2011.

[4] s. kullback and r. leibler. on information and

su   ciency. the annals of mathematical statistics,
22(1):79   86, 1951.

[5] e. mishaud. twitter: expressions of the whole self.

master   s thesis, department of media and
communications, university of london, 2007.

[6] s. petrovi  c, m. osborne, and v. lavrenko. streaming

   rst story detection with application to twitter. in
human language technologies: the 2010 annual
conference of the north american chapter of the

association for computational linguistics
(hlt-naacl    10), pages 181   189. acl, 2010.

[7] s. zhao, l. zhong, j. wickramasuriya, and

v. vasudevan. human as real-time sensors of social and
physical events: a case study of twitter and sports
games. arxiv preprint arxiv:1106.4300, 2011.

[8] a. zubiaga, d. spina, e. amig  o, and j. gonzalo.

towards real-time summarization of scheduled events
from twitter streams. in proceedings of the 23nd acm
conference on hypertext and social media (ht    12),
ht    12. acm, acm, 2012.

[9] a. zubiaga, d. spina, v. fresno, and r. mart    nez.

classifying trending topics: a typology of conversation
triggers on twitter. in proceedings of the 20th acm
international conference on information and knowledge
management (cikm    11), pages 2461   2464, 2011.

