proceedings, ci 2012

a computational analysis of collective discourse

vahed qazvinian
department of eecs
university of michigan
ann arbor, mi, 48109

vahed@umich.edu

dragomir r. radev
school of information
department of eecs
university of michigan
ann arbor, mi, 48109

radev@umich.edu

2
1
0
2

 
r
p
a
7
1

 

 
 
]
i
s
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
8
9
4
3

.

4
0
2
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract
this paper is focused on the computational analysis of
collective discourse, a collective behavior seen in non-
expert content contributions in online social media. we
collect and analyze a wide range of real-world collective
discourse datasets from movie user reviews to microblogs
and news headlines to scienti   c citations. we show that
all these datasets exhibit diversity of perspective, a prop-
erty seen in other collective systems and a criterion in
wise crowds. our experiments also con   rm that the
network of di   erent perspective co-occurrences exhibits
the small-world property with high id91 of di   erent
perspectives. finally, we show that non-expert contribu-
tions in collective discourse can be used to answer simple
questions that are otherwise hard to answer.

introduction
collective behavior refers to social processes that are
not centrally coordinated and emerge spontaneously
(blumer 1951). this de   nition distinguishes collective
behavior from group behavior in a number of ways: (a)
collective systems involve limited social interactions, (b)
membership is    uid, and (c) it generates weak and un-
conventional norms (smelser 1963). collective behavior
is normally characterized by a complex system (miller
& page 2007). a complex system is a system composed
of interconnected parts (agents, processes, etc.) that as
a whole exhibit one or more properties called emergent
behavior. the emergent behavior, which is not obvi-
ous from the properties of the individuals, is called to
be nonlinear (not derivable from the summations of the
activity of individual components).

nonlinear behavior has been widely observed in nature
in the past. gordon (1999) explains how harvester ants
achieve task allocation without any central control and
only by means of continual adjustment. moreover she
argues that the cooperative behavior in the ant colony
merely results from local interactions between individ-
ual ants and not a central controller. for instance, in
ant colonies individual members react to local stimuli
(in the form of chemical scent) depending only on their
local environment. in the absence of a centralized de-
cision maker, ant colonies exhibit complex behavior to
solve geometric problems like shortest paths to food or
maximum distance from all colony entrances to dispose
of dead bodies.

self-organized behavior is not speci   c to ants. schools

of    sh,    ocks of birds, herd of ungulate mammals
are other examples of complex systems among ani-
mal groups (fisher 2009). similarly pedestrians on a
crowded sidewalk exhibit self-organization that leads to
forming lanes along which walkers move in the same di-
rections (boccara 2010). it is argued that all examples
of complex systems exhibit common characteristics:

1. they are composed of a large number of inter-connected

parts (i.e., agents)

2. the system is self-organized in that there is not central

controller.

3. they exhibit emergent behavior: properties seen in

the group but not observable

in social sciences, a lot of work has been done on collec-
tive systems and their properties (hong & page 2009).
however, there is only little work that studies a collective
system in which individual members collectively describe
an event or an object.
in our work, we focus on the
computational analysis of collective discourse, a collec-
tive behavior seen in interactive content contribution in
online social media (qazvinian & radev 2011).

in this paper, we show that collective discourse ex-
hibits diversity of opinions, a property that is de   ned
by (surowiecki 2004) as a necessary criterion for wise
crowds.

background
previously, it has been argued that diversity is essential
in intelligent collective decision-making. page (2007) ar-
gues that the diversity of people and groups, which en-
able new perspectives, leads to better decision making.
he    nds that the diversity of perspectives in a collec-
tive system is associated with higher rates of innovation
and can enhance the capacity for    nding solutions to
complex problems. similarly, hong & page (2004) show
that a random group of intelligent problem solvers can
bene   t from diversity and outperform a group of the best
problem solvers.

prior work has also studied the diversity of perspec-
tives in content contribution and text summarization.
in prior work on evaluating independent contributions
in content generation, voorhees (1998) studied ir sys-
tems and showed that relevance judgments vary sig-
ni   cantly between humans but relative rankings are

proceedings, ci 2012

similarly,

more stable across annotators.
van hal-
teren & teufel (2004) designed an experiment, which
asked 40 dutch students and 10 nlp researchers to
summarize a bbc news report, resulting in 50 di   er-
ent summaries. they calculated the kappa statistic
(carletta 1996, krippendor    1980) and observed high
inter-judge agreement, suggesting that the task of atomic
semantic unit (factoid) extraction can be robustly per-
formed in naturally occurring text.

the diversity of perspectives and the unprecedented
growth of the factoid inventory have in   uenced other
research areas in natural language processing such as
text summarization and paraphrase generation. summa-
rization evaluations are performed by assessing the infor-
mation content with respect to salience and diversity in
the summaries that are generated automatically (sp  arck-
jones 1999, van halteren & teufel 2003, nenkova &
passonneau 2004).

leveraging the diverse range of perspectives has also
played a critical role in developing new paraphrase gener-
ation systems by providing massive amounts of data that
is easily collectable. for instance, chen & dolan (2011)
performed a study and collected highly parallel data,
used for training paraphrase generation systems from
descriptions that participants wrote for video segments
from youtube. such parallel corpora of document pairs
that represent the same semantic information in di   er-
ent languages can be extracted from user contributions in
wikipedia and be used for learning translations of words
and phrases (yih, toutanova, platt & meek 2011).

collective discourse
with the growth of web 2.0, millions of individuals in-
volve in collective discourse. they participate in online
discussions, share their opinions, and generate content
about the same artifacts, objects, and news events in
web portals like amazon.com, epinions.com, imdb.com
and so forth. this massive amount of text is mainly
written on the web by non-expert individuals with dif-
ferent perspectives, and yet exhibits accurate knowledge
as a whole.

in social media, collective discourse is often a collective
reaction to an event. a collective reaction to a well-
de   ned subject emerges in response to an event (a movie
release, a breaking story, a newly published paper) in
the form of independent writings (movie reviews, news
headlines, citation sentences) by many individuals. to
analyze collective discourse, we perform our analysis on
a wide range of real-world datasets.

dataset
movie reviews
microblogs
news headlines
citations

#clusters

average #docs

100
15
25
25

965
110
55
52

table 1. number and size of collective discourse datasets
studied in this paper.

and di   use either in time or scope such as the economy
or education. table 1 lists the set of collective discourse
corpora that we have analyzed as well as the number of
datasets and average number of documents in each of
them. in the following, we further explain each of these
collective discourse corpora.

movie reviews
the    rst collective discourse that we are interested in an-
alyzing is the set of reviews that non-expert users write
about a movie. the set of online reviews about an object
is a perfect case of collective human behavior. upon its
release, each movie, book, or product receives hundreds
and thousands of online reviews from non-expert web
users. these reviews, while discussing the same object,
focus on di   erent aspects of the object. for instance, in
movie reviews, some reviewers solely focus on a few fa-
mous actors, while some discuss other aspects like music
or screenplay.

to study collective discourse in movie reviews, we col-
lected all the user reviews for 100 randomly selected
movies from the top 250 movies list in the internet movie
database (imdb)1. for each of these 100 movies, we also
obtained plot keywords provided on the imdb website.
our collected corpora consist of more than 96,500 user
reviews posted for movies from 19 di   erent genres.

the following excerpts are extracted from user reviews
for the movie pulp fiction, and show how non-expert
reviewers focus on di   erent aspects of the movie.

   ... starred by many well-known actors, such as: john
travolta, samuel l. jackson, uma thurman, bruce
willis and many. directed by quentin tarantino, the
eccentric director ...   

   ... pulp    ction was nominated for seven academy

awards and won only one for screen writing ...   

   ... shocking, intelligent, exciting, hilarious and oddly
though-provoking. best bit: jackson   s bible quote ...   

corpus construction
an essential step and an important contribution in our
work is gathering a comprehensive corpus of datasets on
collective discourse. we focus on social media consisting
of independent contributions of many individuals. fur-
thermore, we focus on topics corresponding to speci   c
items and events as opposed to issues that are evolving

microblogs
the second type of collective discourse that we study
in our work is the set of tweets written about a news
story.
in addition to other advantages, using twitter
as a corpus of collective discourse does present unusual

1http://www.imdb.com/chart/top

proceedings, ci 2012

challenges. in twitter, posts are limited to 140 charac-
ters and often contain information in an unusually com-
pressed form.

first, we use the set of tweets collected by (qazvinian,
rosengren, radev & mei 2011) about sarah palin   s di-
vorce rumor that was popular during the 2008 presiden-
tial election campaigns. this dataset contains tweets
that are about this story and yet discuss it from di   er-
ent angles. for example, the following tweets are ex-
tracted from this dataset and reveal various facts about
the story. one aspect is that a blogger has started the
spread, and is threatened with libel suit. another aspect
is that the rumor has been debunked on facebook.

   palins lawyer threatens divorce blogger with libel suit,
gives her the option of receiving the summons at her
resid... http://ow.ly/15jdo6.   

   @jose3030 palin divorce is supposedly debunked on
facebook, but i think they are just spinning it, until
they can announce it.   

   rt @mediaite: sarah palin uses facebook to deny un-

sourced divorce rumors - http://bit.ly/14xy6h ch.   

as our second microblog dataset, we collected the tweets
that talk about the cancellation rumors of 14 tv shows
in august of 2011. for instance, one of our collected
datasets is about the rumor that charlie sheen might
go back to the tv show two and a half men.

   charlie sheen claims    discussions    about returning
to    two and a half men   : in boston for his national
tour, c... http://bit.ly/hibowf.   

charlie sheen    two and a half men    return not hap-

pening: report http://dlvr.it/lctkd.   

news headlines
another collective discourse is seen when a story breaks
and various news agencies write stories about it. these
stories all talk about the story, but view it from di   erent
perspectives.

we collected 25 news clusters from google news2. each
cluster consists of a set of unique headlines about the
same story, written by di   erent sources. the following
example shows 3 headlines in our datasets that are about
hurricane bill and its damage in maine.

   hurricane bill sweeps several people into ocean.   

   7-year-old girl swept away by bill wave dies after res-

cue.   

   maine ranger: wave viewers didn   t heed warnings.   

citation sentences
the    nal collective discourse example that we study is
the set of citation sentences that di   erent scholars write
about a speci   c paper. a citation sentence to an article,
p , is a sentence that appears in the literature and cites

p . each citation to p may or may not discuss one of p    s
contributions.

for example, the following set of citations to eisner   s
work (eisner 1996) illustrate the set of factoid about
this paper and suggest that di   erent authors who cite
a particular paper may discuss di   erent contributions
(fatoids) of that paper.

in the context of dps, this edge based factorization

method was proposed by (eisner, 1996).

eisner (1996) gave a generative model with a cubic
parsing algorithm based on an edge factorization of
trees.

eisner (1996) proposed an o(n3) parsing algorithm for

pdg.

if the parse has to be projective, eisner   s bottom-up-
span algorithm (eisner, 1996) can be used for the
search.

other collective discourse datasets
the study of collective discourse helps us understand
new aspects of an object that are hard to identify with a
single authoritative view. collective discourse examples
are not limited to the datasets that we have collected.
for instance, studying a complete set of introductions
about id95 enables us to learn about its impor-
tant aspects such as the algorithm, the damping factor,
and the power method, as well as aspects that are less
known such as its use in 1940s (franceschet 2010). sim-
ilar examples exist in di   erent tv show synopsis, book
descriptions, story narrations and many more.

diverse perspectives
in social sciences, a perspective is de   ned as a map from
reality to one   s internal language, which is used to de-
scribe millions of objects, events, or situations (page
2007). each word in the internal language refers to a con-
cept (factoid) that can be expressed by means of a spoken
language using various words or phrases (nuggets). more
accurately, a factoid is an atomic semantic unit, which
can be represented using di   erent phrasal information
units or nuggets (qazvinian & radev 2011, van halteren
& teufel 2003).

for instance, the    death of a 7-year-old girl    and    kid, 7,
dies    are the same factoids about the hurricane bill story
but represented di   erently (using di   erent nuggets).
sweeping several people and warnings before the hurri-
cane are some other factoids in the set of headlines about
this story. these factoids show that di   erent news re-
porters focus on di   erent aspects of the hurricane story.
similarly,    sarah palin using facebook to debunk the
rumor    is a factoid in the microblog dataset, and    a
bible quote mentioned by samuel jackson    is a factoid
that appears in the movie reviews about pulp fiction.

proceedings, ci 2012

factoid
fb
family
alaska
quit
affairs
gay
camp
montana
libel
blog

#tweets perspective description
debunked on facebook
family values
alaska report   s evidence
resignation and divorce
a   airs
gay marriage ban
her camp denies the rumor
moving to montana
libel suit against the rumor
blogger who started the rumor

414
106
87
72
58
36
36
33
24
19

table 2. di   erent factoids extracted from the palin
dataset with the number of tweets that mention them,
and short descriptions.

annotations
for each collective discourse dataset, we construct the
set of factoids that represent various aspects of a story
or a movie or di   erent contributions of a paper.

for the microblogs dataset, we asked two annotators to
go over all the tweets and identify a set of factoids that
represent di   erent aspects of each rumor. we then man-
ually marked each tweet with the factoid that is relevant
to the tweet. each factoid is usually covered by a num-
ber of tweets, and each tweet covers one or more factoids.
however, we did not observe any tweets that cover more
than 2 factoids in our datasets. the small number of
factoids covered by each tweet is most likely due to the
length limit enforced by twitter on each post.

table 2 lists the factoids extracted from the sarah palin.s
divorce rumor dataset. this table shows that the 414
tweets discuss how    facebook is used to debunk the
rumor,    while the    libel suit against the blogger who
started the rumor    is only mentioned in 24 tweets of the
total 789 tweets.

to calculate the inter-judge agreement, we annotated
100 microblog instances on sarah palin twice, and cal-
culated the statistic as

   =

p r(a)     p r(  )

1     p r(  )

where p r(a) is the relative observed agreement among
the two annotators on the 10 factoids from table 2,
and p r(  ) is the id203 that annotators agree by
chance if each annotator is randomly assigning cate-
gories. based on this formulation, we reach a value of
0.913 in   , and 93% agreement between the two annota-
tors.

we also annotated the set of citations and news head-
lines in the same fashion. particularly, we asked two an-
notators to extract factoids for each of the 25 news and
citation clusters, and then match individual documents
(headline or citation sentence) with relevant factoids.
previously we have shown high agreement in human
judgments for extracting factoids from these datasets
(       0.8) (qazvinian & radev 2011).

dataset
movie reviews
microblogs
news headlines
citations

number of factoids
131.31    52.67
2.93    2.05
7.48    4.02
5.48    1.96

table 3. average number of factoids in various collective
discourse corpora.

for the movie review clusters, we downloaded the list of
cast names as well as the list of plot keywords provided
for each movie by imdb, as the set of factoids about the
movie2.

table 3 lists the average number of factoids for each col-
lective discourse corpus. for the movie reviews, there
is an average of 131 factoids per movie, and for cita-
tions, headlines and microblogs, our annotators identify
an average of 5, 7, and 3 factoids respectively.

diversity
surowiecki (2004) de   nes 4 criteria for a crowd to be
wise: (1) people in the crowd should have diverse knowl-
edge of facts (diversity); (2) people should act indepen-
dently and their opinion should not be a   ected by that of
others (independence); (3) people should have access to
local knowledge (decentralization); and (4) a mechanism
should exist to turn individual judgments into collective
intelligence (aggregation).

here, we present evidence that the individuals who en-
gage in collective discourse have diverse perspectives and
interpret things di   erently.

novelty and redundancy
to investigate the diversity of perspectives, we look at
the frequency distribution of various factoids in di   er-
ent corpora by extracting the number of individuals that
mention each factoid, f , in the annotated clusters. fig-
ure 1 shows the log-log scale cumulative id203 dis-
tribution for these counts (i.e., the id203 that a
factoid will be mentioned by at least c di   erent people)
in all of our collective discourse corpora. this    gure sug-
gests that factoid mention frequencies exhibit a highly
skewed distribution with many factoids mentioned only
once and a very few factoids mentioned by a large num-
ber of people. for instance, in the pulp fiction example,
   bruce willis    and    quentin tarantino    are very pop-
ular factoids and most reviewers mention them, while
   rene beard   ,    frank whaley    (two other actors), or
   jackson   s bible quote    are among many factoids that
are not as frequently mentioned.

small-world of factoids

2we admit that the set of cast names and plot keywords
provided by imdb does not include all the factoids about
the movie. however, since creating gold standard data from
complete user reviews is fairly arduous, and we did not pursue
manual annotations for movies.

movie reviews

 

pr(x     c)

100

citations

 

pr(x     c)

c

crandom

   

0.814

0.072

1.613

   random
2.627

proceedings, ci 2012

)
c
 
   
 
x

(
r

p

100

10   1

10   2

10   3

10   4

 
100

100

10   1

)
c
 
   
 
x

(
r

p

10   2

 
100

101

102

c

headlines

103

 

pr(x     c)

10   1

)
c
 
   
 
x

(
r

p

10   2

 
100

100

)
c
 
   
 
x

(
r

p

10   1

101

c

tweets

 

pr(x     c)

101
c

102

 
100

101

c

102

figure 1. the cumulative id203 distribution for the
frequency of factoids (i.e., the id203 that a factoid
will be mentioned in c di   erent summaries) across in each
corpus.

recent research has shown that a wide range of natural
graphs such as the biological networks (ravasz, somera,
mongru, oltvai & barab  asi 2002), food webs (montoya
& sol  e 2002), electronic circuits (ferrer i cancho, janssen
& sol  e 2001), brain neurons (bassett & bullmore 2006),
and human languages (ferrer i cancho & sol  e 2001) ex-
hibit the small-world property. this common character-
istic can be detected from two basic statistical properties:
the id91 coe   cient c , and the average shortest
path length    .

the id91 coe   cient of a graph measures the num-
ber of closed triangles in the graph. the id91 coef-
   cient describes how likely it is that two neighbors of a
vertex are connected (newman 2003). watts & strogatz
(1998) de   ne the id91 coe   cient as the average of
the local id91 values for each vertex.

c =

pn
i=1 ci
n

the local id91 coe   cient, ci for the ith vertex is the
number of triangles connected to vertex i divided by the
total possible number of triangles connected to vertex.
watts & strogatz (1998) show that small-world networks
are highly clustered and obtain relatively short paths
(i.e.,     is small). these networks are usually studied in
contrast with random networks in which both     and c
obtain small values.

to understand the relationship between various aspects
of a story or subject and to study the relationship be-
tween di   erent individuals    contributions, we analyze the
network of factoids.

for each dataset, we build a network in which nodes rep-
resent di   erent factoids and there is an edge between two

table 4. average id91 coe   cient (c) and the aver-
age shortest path length (   ) in the networks of the col-
lective discourse corpora and the corresponding random
networks.

nodes if the corresponding factoids have been mentioned
together in at least 10 documents. using these networks,
we would like to investigate whether there are many fac-
toid pairs that co-occur in individual user contributions,
and whether there are communities of factoids that co-
occur more frequently than others. for each network,
we use the same number of nodes and edges and gen-
erate a random network using the erd  os   r  enyi model,
which sets an edge between each pair of nodes with equal
id203, independently of the other edges (erd  os &
r  enyi 1960).

table 4 lists the average id91 coe   cient (c) and the
average shortest path length (   ) in the networks built
using factoid co-occurrences. this table con   rms that
the id91 coe   cient in the factoid networks is gen-
erally signi   cantly greater than random networks of the
same size. moreover, this table con   rms that the average
shortest paths in the random networks are small.

ferrer i cancho & sol  e (2001) and motter, de moura,
lai & dasgupta (2002) perform similar experiments and
show that the word co-occurrence and word synonymy
networks have small-world properties. however, we be-
lieve that this is the    rst work that shows the small-
world e   ect in human language at the factoid level (net-
work of concepts). this    nding further justi   es the con-
clusion made by (motter et al. 2002), who emphasize
that human memory is associative (i.e., information is
retrieved by connecting similar concepts) in which the
small-world property of the network maximizes the re-
trieval e   ciency. more precisely, high id91 of the
network causes similar pieces of information to be stored
together, and low shortest paths make very di   erent
pieces of information to be separated only by a few links,
guaranteeing a fast search.

wise crowds
previous work has studied crowd wisdom in online con-
tent contributions. wikipedia for instance, has been
named as an example of a successful collective e   ort.
kittur, chi, pendleton, suh & mytkowicz (2007) study
user contributions in wikipedia and suggest that the
main workload is wikipedia is driven by    common    users
and that admin in   uence has dramatically decreased
over years. furthermore, kittur & kraut (2008) show
that adding more editors to an article results in higher
article quality when appropriate coordination techniques
are used. in this section, we present some evidence of
wisdom in collective discourse that is not achievable from
individuals or from smaller groups. in our experiments,

proceedings, ci 2012

rank genre
1
action
2
sci-   
war
3
4
fantasy
history
5
6
animation
7
adventure
romance
8
drama
9
10
family

sg

relevance

0.241
0.124
0.105
0.087
0.086
0.062
0.051
0.039
0.025
0.023

1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0

table 5. top 10 genres extracted for the movie    avatar   
from user reviews.

we try to answer a simple question about a movie just
by using its set of reviews.

the question we try to answer is to    nd each movie   s
genre. as the gold standard, we collected the genres for
each of the 100 movies for which we had user reviews.
each movie is associated with a few (3-4) genres out of
a total of 19 genre names.

to extract the list of possible genres for a movie, we
match all the genre names against the reviews and rank
them based on their relative frequency. more partic-
ularly, the score of each genre, g for a movie with n
reviews (d1...dn ) is calculated as

sg =

pn

i=1 1di mentions g

n

table 5 lists the top 10 genres retrieved for the movie
   avatar    form user reviews together with the score of
each genre and the relevance according to the gold stan-
dard that we obtained from imdb. this table shows an
example in which all the 4 genre names for avatar are
among the 7 most frequently genres mentioned by non-
expert users.

to evaluate the ranked list of retrieved genre names, we
use mean average precision and f-score. the mean
average precision (map) for a set of queries (movie
names in our experiments) is calculated as the mean of
the average precision scores for each query. the average
precision for each query, q is calculated as

apq =

pn
k=1 p recision@k    rel(k)
number of relevant genres

(1)

where rel(k) obtains a value of 1 if the kth retrieved
genre is correct and 0 otherwise. we also calculate f  =3
when top 3 genres from the top of the ranked list are
retrieved as relevant. table 6 lists the results of this
experiment.

to see how useful the set of reviews is for this particular
task, we compare it with ranking genre names randomly

method map
reviews
0.698
random 0.260

95% c.i.

[0.657 , 0.740]
[0.229 , 0.290]

f  =3
0.550
0.140

95% c.i.

[0.499 , 0.600]
[0.101 , 0.179]

table 6. mean average precision and f-score for genre
extraction from a set of reviews (c.i.: con   dence inter-
val).

and repeating the experiment. as table 6 shows, using
simple mention frequency measures provides signi   cant
improvements over guessing the genre randomly.

the numbers in table 6 are calculated using all the user
reviews collected for each movie (ranging from a few hun-
dreds to a few thousands per movie). here, we would
like to investigate if having more reviews will give us
a more accurate estimate of the genres associated with
each movie.

figure 2 plots the 95% con   dence interval of map ver-
sus the number of randomly selected user reviews used
to rank the genres for each movie. this    gure, which
is plotted on a semi-log scale, shows that the quality of
ranking grows rapidly by the 100th randomly selected
review and exhibits asymptotic behavior when more re-
views are visited.

)

p
a
m

i

i

(
 
n
o
s
c
e
r
p
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
a
 
n
a
e
m

0.8

0.75

0.7

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

100

101

102

number of reviews

103

figure 2. mean average precision (map) versus the
number of reviews used to extract each movie genre. (the
shaded area shows 95% con   dence interval for each map
result)

conclusion and future work
we studied collective discourse and investigated diverse
perspectives when a number of non-expert web users
engage in collective behavior and generate content on
the web. we show that the set of people who discuss
the same story or subject have diverse perspectives, in-
troducing new aspects that have not been previously dis-
cussed by others.

proceedings, ci 2012

we analyzed a wide range of collective discourse exam-
ples, from movie reviews and news stories to scienti   c
citations and microblogs. to the best of our knowl-
edge this is the    rst work that studies the diversity in
perspectives, and the small world-e   ect in factoid co-
occurrences. we also perform an experiment that pro-
vides some evidence of collective intelligence in the col-
lectively written set of reviews by non-expert users.

the ultimate goal of this work is to develop mod-
els of collective discourse. the models would be in-
formed by empirical analysis of varied and large-scale
datasets and would address various aspects of collective
discourse: motivation behind continuous contributions,
heterogeneity and diversity in perspectives, and collec-
tive intelligence from collaboration. by formulating sim-
ple stochastic models of individual and group behavior,
we may be able to predict phenomena on the macro level
of discourse. we will be trying to address these questions
by developing state of the art technologies in computa-
tional linguistics, network science and social theories of
mass communications.

acknowledgments
this work is supported by the national science foun-
dation grants    socs: assessing information credibil-
ity without authoritative sources    as iis-0968489, and
   iopener: a flexible framework to support rapid
learning in unfamiliar research domains    as iis-0705832.
any opinions,    ndings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily re   ect the views of the national
science foundation.

references
bassett, d. s. & bullmore, e. (2006),    small-world
brain networks   , the neuroscientist 12(6), 512   523.

blumer, h. (1951),    collective behavior   , in lee, alfred
mcclung, ed., principles of sociology. .

boccara, n. (2010), modeling complex systems,
springer verlag.

carletta, j. (1996),    assessing agreement on
classi   cation tasks: the kappa statistic   , computational
linguistics 22(2), 249   254.

chen, d. & dolan, w. (2011), collecting highly
parallel data for paraphrase evaluation, portland,
oregon, usa, pp. 190   200.

eisner, j. (1996), three new probabilistic models for
id33: an exploration, in    proceedings of
the 34th annual conference of the association for
computational linguistics (acl-96)   , association for
computational linguistics, pp. 340   345.

erd  os, p. & r  enyi, a. (1960),    on the evolution of
random graphs   , publications of the mathematical
institute of the hungarian academy of sciences
5, 17   60.

ferrer i cancho, r., janssen, c. & sol  e, r. v. (2001),
   the topology of technology graphs: small world
patterns in electronic circuits   , physical review e
64(4), 046119   1   046119   5.

ferrer i cancho, r. & sol  e, r. v. (2001),    the
small-world of human language   , proceedings of the
royal society of london b 268(1482), 2261   2265.

fisher, l. (2009), the perfect swarm: the science of
complexity in everyday life, basic books.

franceschet, m. (2010), id95: stand on the
shoulders of giants, report, department of
mathematics and computer science, university of
udine.

gordon, d. m. (1999),    ants at work: how an insect
society is organized   .

hong, l. & page, s. e. (2004),    groups of diverse
problem solvers can outperform groups of high-ability
problem solvers   , proceedings of the national academy
of sciences 101(46), 16385     16389.

hong, l. & page, s. e. (2009),    interpreted and
generated signals   , journal of economic theory
144(5), 2174   2196.

kittur, a., chi, e., pendleton, b. a., suh, b. &
mytkowicz, t. (2007),    power of the few vs. wisdom of
the crowd: wikipedia and the rise of the bourgeoisie   ,
alt.chi at 25th annual acm conference on human
factors in computing systems (chi-2007) 1(2).

kittur, a. & kraut, r. e. (2008), harnessing the
wisdom of crowds in wikipedia: quality through
coordination, in    proceedings of the 2008 acm
conference on computer supported cooperative work
(cscw-2008)   , pp. 37   46.

krippendor   , k. (1980), content analysis: an
introduction to its methodology, beverly hills: sage
publications.

miller, j. h. & page, s. e. (2007), complex adaptive
systems, an introduction to computational models os
social life, princeton university press, 41 william
street, princeton, new jersey 08540.

montoya, j. m. & sol  e, r. v. (2002),    small world
patterns in food webs   , journal of theoretical biology
214(3), 405   412.

motter, a. e., de moura, a. p. s., lai, y.-c. &
dasgupta, p. (2002),    topology of the conceptual
network of language   , physical revire e 65(065102).

nenkova, a. & passonneau, r. (2004), evaluating
content selection in summarization: the pyramid
method, in    proceedings of the north american
chapter of the association for computational
linguistics - human language technologies
(hlt-naacl    04)   .

newman, m. e. j. (2003),    the structure and function
of complex networks   , siam review 45(2), 167   256.

proceedings, ci 2012

page, s. e. (2007), the di   erence: how the power of
diversity creates better groups, firms, schools, and
societies, princeton university press.

qazvinian, v. & radev, d. r. (2011), learning from
collective human behavior to introduce diversity in
lexical choice, in    proceedings of the 49th annual
conference of the association for computational
linguistics (acl-11)   , pp. 1098   1108.

qazvinian, v., rosengren, e., radev, d. r. & mei, q.
(2011), rumor has it: identifying misinformation in
microblogs, in    proceedings of the conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing
(emnlp-11)   , association for computational
linguistics, edinburgh, scotland, uk., pp. 1589   1599.

ravasz, e., somera, a., mongru, d., oltvai, z. &
barab  asi, a. (2002),    hierarchical organization of
modularity in metabolic networks   , science
297(5586), 1551.

smelser, n. j. (1963), theory of collective behavior,
free press.

sp  arck-jones, k. (1999), automatic summarizing:
factors and directions, in i. mani & m. t. maybury,
eds,    advances in automatic text summarization   , the
mit press, chapter 1, pp. 1     12.

surowiecki, j. (2004), the wisdom of crowds: why the
many are smarter than the few and how collective

wisdom shapes business, economies, societies and
nations, doubleday.

van halteren, h. & teufel, s. (2003), examining the
consensus between human summaries: initial
experiments with factoid analysis, in    proceedings of
the hlt-naacl 03 on text summarization
workshop   , morristown, nj, usa, pp. 57   64.

van halteren, h. & teufel, s. (2004), evaluating
information content by factoid analysis: human
annotation and stability, in    proceedings of the
conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing (emnlp-04)   , barcelona.

voorhees, e. m. (1998), variations in relevance
judgments and the measurement of retrieval
e   ectiveness, in    proceedings of the 21st annual
international acm sigir conference on research and
development in information retrieval (sigir-98)   ,
pp. 315   323.

watts, d. j. & strogatz, s. (1998),    collective dynamics
of small-world networks   , nature 393, 440   442.

yih, w.-t., toutanova, k., platt, j. c. & meek, c.
(2011), learning discriminative projections for text
similarity measures, in    proceedings of the fifteenth
conference on computational natural language
learning   , portland, oregon, usa, pp. 247   256.

