quotus: the structure of political media coverage

as revealed by quoting patterns

vlad niculae      
cornell university

vlad@cs.cornell.edu

caroline suen   
stanford university

cysuen@stanford.edu

justine zhang      
stanford university

justinez@stanford.edu

cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil   

cornell university

cristian@cs.cornell.edu

5
1
0
2

 
r
p
a
6

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
8
3
1
0

.

4
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract
given the extremely large pool of events and stories available, me-
dia outlets need to focus on a subset of issues and aspects to convey
to their audience. outlets are often accused of exhibiting a system-
atic bias in this selection process, with different outlets portraying
different versions of reality. however, in the absence of objective
measures and empirical evidence, the direction and extent of sys-
tematicity remains widely disputed.

in this paper we propose a framework based on quoting patterns
for quantifying and characterizing the degree to which media out-
lets exhibit systematic bias. we apply this framework to a massive
dataset of news articles spanning the six years of obama   s presi-
dency and all of his speeches, and reveal that a systematic pattern
does indeed emerge from the outlet   s quoting behavior. moreover,
we show that this pattern can be successfully exploited in an unsu-
pervised prediction setting, to determine which new quotes an out-
let will select to broadcast. by encoding bias patterns in a low-rank
space we provide an analysis of the structure of political media cov-
erage. this reveals a latent media bias space that aligns surprisingly
well with political ideology and outlet type. a linguistic analysis
exposes striking differences across these latent dimensions, show-
ing how the different types of media outlets portray different reali-
ties even when reporting on the same events. for example, outlets
mapped to the mainstream conservative side of the latent space fo-
cus on quotes that portray a presidential persona disproportionately
characterized by negativity.
categories and subject descriptors: h.2.8 [database manage-
ment]: database applications   data mining
general terms: algorithms; experimentation.
keywords: media bias; quotes; news media; political science.

   the    rst three authors contributed equally and are ordered alpha-
betically. the last two authors are also ordered alphabetically.
   the research described herein was conducted in part while these
authors were at the max planck institute for software systems.

copyright is held by the international world wide web conference com-
mittee (iw3c2). iw3c2 reserves the right to provide a hyperlink to the
author   s site if the material is used in electronic media.
www 2015, may 18   22, 2015, florence, italy.
acm 978-1-4503-3469-3/15/05.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2736277.2741688.

jure leskovec
stanford university

jure@cs.stanford.edu

1.

introduction

the public relies heavily on mass media outlets for accessing
important information on current events. given the intrinsic space
and time constraints these outlets face, some    ltering of events,
stories and aspects to broadcast is unavoidable.

the majority of media outlets claim to be balanced in their cov-
erage, selecting issues purely based on their newsworthiness. how-
ever, journalism watchdogs and political think-tanks often accuse
outlets of exhibiting systematic bias in the selection process, lean-
ing either towards serving the interests of the owners and journalists
or towards appeasing the preferences of their intended audience.
this phenomenon, generally called media bias, has been exten-
sively studied in political science, economics and communication
literature (for a survey see [26]). theoretical accounts provide a
taxonomy of media bias based on the level at which the selection
takes place: e.g., what issues and aspects are covered (issue and
facts bias), how facts are presented (framing bias) or how they are
commented on (ideological stand bias).
importantly, the dimen-
sions along which bias operates can be very diverse: although the
most commonly discussed dimension aligns with political ideology
(e.g., liberal vs. conservative bias) other dimensions such as main-
stream bias, corporate bias, power bias, and advertising bias are
also important and perceived as inadequate journalism practices.

bias is a highly subjective phenomenon that is hard to quantify   
something that is considered unfairly biased by some might be re-
garded as balanced by others. for example, a recent gallup sur-
vey [22] shows not only that the majority of americans (57%) per-
ceive media as being biased, but also that the perception of bias
varies vastly depending on their self-declared ideology: 73% of
conservatives perceive the media as having a liberal bias, while
only 11% of liberals perceive it as having a liberal bias (and 33%
perceive it as having a conservative bias). as a consequence, the
extent and direction of bias for individual media outlets remains
highly disputed.1

the subjective nature of this phenomenon and the absence of
large scale objectively labeled data hindered quantitative analy-
ses [13], and consequently most existing empirical studies of media
bias are small focused analyses [6, 25, 28]. a few notable compu-
tational studies circumvent these limitations by relying on proxies
such as the similarity between media outlets and the members of
congress [8, 11, 20] or u. s. supreme court justices [13]. still, the
reliance on such proxies constrains the analysis to predetermined

1in response to numerous accusations, the 21st century fox ceo
rupert murdoch has declared    i challenge anybody to show me an
example of bias in fox news channel.    (salon, 3/1/01).

figure 1: volume of quotations for each word from a fragment of the 2010 state of the union address split by political leaning:
conservative outlets shown in red and liberal outlets shown in blue. quotes from the marked positions are reproduced in table 1 and
shown in the quotus visualization in figure 2.

position quote from the 2010 state of the union address

a

b

c

d

e

and in the last year, hundreds of al qaeda   s    ghters and af   liates, including many senior leaders, have been captured
or killed   far more than in 2008.

i will work with congress and our military to    nally repeal the law that denies gay americans the right to serve the
country they love because of who they are. it   s the right thing to do.

each time lobbyists game the system or politicians tear each other down instead of lifting this country up, we lose faith.
the more that tv pundits reduce serious debates to silly arguments, big issues into sound bites, our citizens turn away.

democracy in a nation of 300 million people can be noisy and messy and complicated. and when you try to do big
things and make big changes, it stirs passions and controversy. that   s just how it is.

but i wake up every day knowing that they are nothing compared to the setbacks that families all across this country
have faced this year.

table 1: quotes corresponding to the positions marked in figure 1.

dimension of bias, and conditions the value of the results on the
accuracy of the proxy assumptions [7, 18].
present work: unsupervised framework. we present a frame-
work for quantifying the systematic bias exhibited by media out-
lets, without relying on any annotation and without predetermining
the dimensions of bias. the basic operating principle of this frame-
work is that quoting patterns exhibited by individual outlets can
reveal media bias. quotes are especially suitable since they cor-
respond to an outlet   s explicit choices of whether to cover or not
speci   c parts a larger statement. in this sense, quotes have the po-
tential to provide precise insight into the decision process behind
media coverage.

ultimately, the goal of the proposed framework is to quantify
to what extent quoting decisions follow systematic patterns that go
beyond the relative importance (or newsworthiness) of the quotes,
and to characterize the dimensions of this bias.

as a motivating example, figure 1 illustrates media quotations
from a fragment of the u.s. president, barack obama   s 2010 state
of the union address. the text is ordered along the x axis, and
the y axis corresponds to the number of times a particular part of
the address was quoted. we display quoting volume by outlets
considered2 to be liberal (blue) or conservative (red). we observe
both similarities and differences in what parts of the address get
quoted. for example, the quote at position b (reproduced in ta-
ble 1) is highly cited by both sides, while the quote at position a is

cited by conservative outlets and largely ignored by liberal outlets.3
to a certain extent, the audience of the liberal media experienced a
different state of the union address than the audience of the con-
servative group. are these variations just random    uctuations, or
are they the result of a systematically biased selection process? do
different media outlets portray consistently different realities even
when reporting on the same events?

to study and identify the presence of systematic bias at a large
scale, we start from a massive collection of six billion news ar-
ticles [16] (over 20tb of compressed data) which spans the six
years of barack obama   s tenure in of   ce as the president of the
united states (potus), between 2009 and 2014. we use the 2,274
public speeches made by obama during this period (including state
of the union addresses, weekly presidential addresses and various
press conferences). we match quotes from obama   s speeches to
our news articles and build an outlet-to-quote bipartite graph link-
ing 275 media outlets to the over 267,000 quotes which they repro-
duce. the graph allows us to study the structure of political media
coverage over a long period of time and over a diverse set of public
issues, while at the same time maintaining uniformity with respect
to the person who is quoted.
focused analysis. before applying our unsupervised framework to
the entire data, we    rst perform a small-scale focused analysis on a
carefully constructed subset of labeled outlet leanings, in order to
gain intuition about the nature of the data. we label outlets based
on liberal and conservative leaning, as well as on whether or not

2while our core methodology is completely unsupervised and not
limited to the conservative   liberal direction, we use a small set of
manual labels for interpretation (as detailed in section 3).

3we invite the reader to explore more such examples using the on-
line visualization tool we release with this paper: http://snap.
stanford.edu/quotus/vis

their leaning is self-declared. an empirical investigation of various
characteristics of the outlets and of their articles reveals differences
that further motivate the need for an unsupervised approach that is
not tied to a predetermined dimension of bias.
large-scale analysis. to quantify the degree to which the outlet-
to-quote bipartite graph encodes a systematic pattern that extends
beyond the simple newsworthiness of a quote, we use an unsuper-
vised prediction paradigm.4 the task is to predict whether a given
outlet will select a new quote, based on its previous quoting pat-
tern. we show that, indeed, the patterns encoded in the outlet-to-
quote graph can be exploited ef   ciently via a id105
approach akin to that used by recommender systems. furthermore,
this approach brings signi   cant improvement over baselines that
only encode the popularity of the quote and the propensity of the
outlet to pick up quotes, showing that these can not fully explain
the systematic pattern that drives content selection.

factorizing the outlet-to-quote matrix provides new insights into
the structure of the political media coverage. first, we    nd that our
labeled liberal and conservative outlets are separated in the space
de   ned by the    rst two latent dimensions. moreover, a post-hoc
analysis of the outlets mapped to the extremes of this space reveals
a strong alignment between these two latent dimensions and me-
dia type (mainstream vs. independent) and political ideology. the
separation between outlets along these dimensions is surprisingly
clear, considering that the method is completely unsupervised.

by mapping the quotes onto the same latent space, our method
also reveals how the systematic patterns of the media operate at a
linguistic level. for example, outlets on the conservative side of
the (latent) ideological spectrum are more likely to select obama   s
quotes that contain more negations and negative sentiment, portray-
ing an overly negative character.

to summarize the main contributions of this paper:
    we introduce a completely unsupervised framework for an-
alyzing the patterns behind the media   s selection of what to
cover;

    we apply this framework to a large dataset of presidential
speeches and media coverage thereof which we make pub-
licly available together with an online visualization tool (sec-
tion 2);

    we reveal systematic biases that are predictive of an outlet   s

quoting choices (section 4.1);

    we show that the most important dimensions of bias align
with the ideological spectrum and outlet type (section 4.2);
    we characterize these two dimensions linguistically, expos-
ing striking differences in the way in which different outlets
portray reality (section 4.3).

2. methodology

our analysis framework relies on a bipartite graph that encodes
various outlets    selections of quotes to cite. first, we introduce
the general methodology for building such a bipartite graph from
transcript and news article data. we then apply this methodology
to the particular setting in which we instantiate this graph: with
speeches delivered by president obama and a massive collection
of news articles.
4our approach is unsupervised in the sense of not using any anno-
tation or prior knowlegde about the bias or leaning of either news
outlets or quote content.

2.1 building an outlet-to-quote graph
matching. we begin with the two datasets that we wish to match:
a set of source statements (in our case, presidential speech tran-
scripts), and a set of news articles. we identify the quotes in each
article, and search for a candidate speech and corresponding loca-
tion within the speech from which the quote originates. we allow
approximate matches and align article quotes to the speeches word
by word.

in order to avoid false positives, we set a lower bound l on the
number of words required in each quote. for each remaining quote,
we then examine the speeches that occur before the quote   s corre-
sponding article   s timestamp to    nd a match. since more recent
speeches are more likely to be quoted, for performance reasons
we search the latest speech    rst, and proceed backwards. because
matches that are too distant in time are more likely to be spurious,
we also limit the set of candidates to speeches that occur at most
timespan t before the quote.

we    nd approximate matches using a variant of the needleman-
wunsch id145 algorithm for matching strings us-
ing substring id153. we use an empirically determined sim-
ilarity threshold s to determine whether a quote matches or not.5
the output of our matching process is an alignment between article
quotes and source statements from the transcripts.
identifying quote clusters. news outlets often quote the same part
of a speech in different ways. variations result when articles select
different subparts of the same statement, or choose different para-
phrases of the quote. sometimes these variations can be semantic
while most of the times they are purely syntactic (e.g., resolution
of pronouns). for our purposes, we want to consider all variations
of a quote as a unique quote phrase that the media outlets choose to
distribute. to accomplish this, we group two different quotes into
the same quote cluster if their matched locations within a transcript
overlap on at least    ve words.

the resulting output is a series of quote clusters, each of which
is af   liated with a speci   c area of the statement transcript. the ma-
jority of our analysis considers quotes at the cluster level, instead
of looking at individual quote variants.
article deduplication. to most clearly highlight any relationships
between quote selection and editorial slant, we wish to ensure that
each quote used in analysis is deliberately chosen by the news out-
let that published the corresponding article. however, it is a com-
mon practice among news outlets to republish content generated
by other organizations. notably, most news outlets will frequently
post articles generated by wire services. such curated content,
while endorsed by the outlet, is not necessarily re   ective of the out-
let   s editorial stance, and we can better differentiate outlet quoting
patterns after removing them. duplicate articles need not neces-
sarily be perfectly identical, so we employ fuzzy string matching
using length-normalized levenshtein id153. among each
set of duplicate articles, we keep the one published    rst.
outlet-to-quote bipartite graph. the output after executing our
pipeline above is a set of (outlet, quote phrase) pairs.6 as a    nal
step, we turn these pairs into a directed bipartite graph g, with
outlets and quote clusters as the two disjoint node sets. an edge
u     v exists in g if outlet u has an article that picks up a variant
of quote v.

5in our implementation, we use l = 6, t = 7 days, and s =    0.4.
6some news outlets cite the same quote multiple times across dif-
ferent articles. to minimize the effect of multiple quoting, we keep
only the chronologically earliest quote, and disregard the rest.

figure 2: visualization of the fragment of 2010 state of the union address represented in figure 1 between markers b and c. the
left panel shows text highlighted according to quotation volume and slant. the right panel shows all variants of a selected quote
cluster. an interactive visualization for the entire dataset is available online at http://snap.stanford.edu/quotus/vis/.

number of news outlets
number of presidential speeches
number of unique articles
number of unique quotes
number of quote clusters
number of unique (outlet, cluster) pairs

275
2,274
222,240
267,737
53,504
228,893

table 2: statistics of the news article and presidential speech
dataset used.

2.2 dataset description

we construct a database of presidential speeches by crawling the
archives of public broadcast transcripts from the white house   s
web site.7
in this way we obtain full transcripts of speeches de-
livered by white house   af   liated personnel, spanning from 2009
to 2014. for the purposes of our analyses, we focus on the para-
graphs that are speci   cally spoken by president obama. our news
article collection consists of articles spanning from 2009 to 2014;
each entry includes the article   s title, timestamp, url, and content.
overall the collection contains over six billion articles. to work
with a more manageable amount of data, we run our quote match-
ing pipeline on articles only if they contain the string    obama   ,
and were produced by one of 275 media outlets from a list that
was manually compiled; news outlets on this list were identi   ed as
likely to produce content related to politics. overall, this reduces
the collection to roughly 200gb of compressed news article data.
further statistics about the processed data are displayed in table 2.
visualization. finally, we make the matched data publicly avail-
able and provide an online visualization to serve as an interface for
qualitative investigations of the data.8

figure 2 shows a screenshot of this visualization. quoted pas-
sages have been color-coded with color intensity corresponding to

7http://whitehouse.gov
8http://snap.stanford.edu/quotus/

the volume of quotation, and shade corresponding to editorial slant
(described in section 3.1). the right panel displays variations of
a selected quote   grouped in one of the quote clusters   as repre-
sented by various outlets. each quote is hyperlinked to the articles
containing it. we provide this visualization as a potential tool with
which political scientists and other researchers can develop more
insight about the structure of political media coverage.
3. small-scale focused analysis

to gain intuition about our data and to better understand the
biases that occur in the political news landscape, we    rst focus
our analyses on a small subset of news outlets for which there is
an established or suspected bias according to political science re-
search [2, 9, 11]. we conduct an empirical analysis to compare
outlets in different label categories in terms of their coverage of the
presidential speeches. then, by interpreting this data as a bipartite
graph, we perform a rewiring experiment to quantify the degree to
which outlet categories relate to each other. in doing so, we moti-
vate the need for an unsupervised approach to study the structure
of political media bias at scale (section 4).
3.1 outlet selection

as discussed in the introduction, obtaining reliable labels of out-
let political leaning is a challenge that has hindered quantitative
analysis of this phenomenon. one of the most common dichotomies
considered in the literature is that between liberal and conservative
ideologies. we refer to political science research to construct a
list of twenty-two outlets which we group in four categories: de-
clared conservative, suspected conservative, suspected liberal, and
declared liberal. our selection criteria is as follows:

    if an outlet declares itself to be liberal or conservative, or the
owner explicitly declares a leaning, we refer to the outlet as
declared conservative (dc) or declared liberal (dl). we refer
to such outlets as declared outlets.
    if several bias-related political science studies [2, 9, 11] con-
sistently suggest that an outlet is liberal or conservative, but

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

figure 3: differences between outlet categories: (a) the fraction of articles mentioning the president; (b) the normalized reaction
time to presidential speeches; (c) the average word count of an article; (d) the percentage of quoted content in an article. filled bars
correspond to outlets with declared political slants, and un   lled bars to suspected ones. error bars indicate standard error.

the outlet itself does not have a declared leaning, we label it
as suspected liberal (sl) or suspected conservative (sc). we
refer to such outlets as suspected outlets.

the labeled outlets considered in this sections is shown in table 3.

3.2 outlet and article characteristics

we    rst perform an empirical analysis to explore the relation be-
tween outlet categories. we analyze both general characteristics of
the outlets, as well as properties of the articles citing the president.
percentage of articles discussing obama. first, we simply mea-
sure the percentage of all articles of a given outlet that mention
   obama   . figure 3(a) shows that the fraction of articles discussing
the president is generally higher for declared outlets (both liberal
and conservative;    lled bars) than for suspected ones (un   lled bars).
this aligns with the intuition that outlets with a clear ideological
af   liation are more likely to discuss political issues.
reaction time. declared and suspected outlets also differ in how
early they cover popular speech segments. many sound bites from
obama   s more popular speeches, such as the annual state of the
union address, are cited by a multitude of outlets. here we con-
sider quotes that were cited by at least    ve of the labeled outlets;
for each such quote we sort the citing outlets into a relative time
ranking between 0 and 1, to normalize for cluster size, where a
smaller number indicates a shorter reaction time. aggregated re-
sults by outlet category are shown in figure 3(b). we note that sus-
pected outlets, especially liberal ones, tend to report quotes faster
than those with declared ideology.
article length. we expect the observed difference in reaction time
between different categories of outlets to be re   ected in the type
of articles they publish. the    rst article feature we investigate is
length in words, shown in figure 3(c). we observe that declared
outlets (especially liberal ones) publish substantially longer arti-
cles; this difference is potentially related to the longer time that
these outlets take to cover the respective speeches.
fraction of quoted content. to better understand the article-length
differences, we examine the composition of the articles in terms of
quoted content. in particular, we consider the fraction of words in
the article that are quoted from a presidential speech. figure 3(d)
shows that the (generally shorter) declared conservative articles
have a considerably higher proportion of presidential content than
most declared liberal articles, indicating a different approach to sto-
rytelling that relies more on quotes and less on exposition.

declared conservative (dc)
daily caller
national review
pj media
real clear politics
reason
the blaze
weekly standard
town hall

declared liberal (dl)
crooks and liars
daily kos
mother jones
the nation
washington monthly

suspected liberal (sl)
cbs news
chicago tribune

suspected conservative (sc) id98
cs monitor
fox news
washington times

huf   ngton post
la times
ny times

table 3: labeled outlet categories.

summary. our exploration of the characteristics of a small set of
labeled outlets reveals differences that go beyond the commonly
studied liberal-conservative divide.
in particular, we    nd more
substantial differences between self-declared outlets and suspected
outlets in terms of their propensity of discussing obama, their reac-
tion time to new presidential speeches and the length of the articles
citing these speeches. next we will investigate whether these differ-
ences also carry over to quoting patterns, and discuss how these ob-
servations further motivate an unsupervised approach to the study
of media bias.
3.3 outlet-to-quote graph analysis

we now explore the differences in the quoting patterns of outlets
from the four labeled categories. to this end, we explore the struc-
ture of the bipartite graph g connecting media outlets to the quotes
they cite (introduced in section 2.1), focusing only the sub-graph
induced by the labeled outlets.

we attempt to measure the quoting pattern similarity of outlets
from category b to those from category a as the likelihood of a
source from category b to cite a quote, given that the respective
quote is also cited by some outlet in category a. in terms of the
outlet-to-quote graph g, we can quantify this as the average pro-
portion of quotes cited by outlets in a that are also cited by outlets
in b:

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

mg(b|a) =

1

|o(a)|

1

|i(v)|

(u,v)   o(a)

(a,b)   i(v)

1[a     b, u (cid:54)= a],

dlsldcsc10%20%30%40%50%60%% articles mentioning obamadlsldcsc0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7average reaction timedlsldcsc05001000150020002500average article lengthdlslscdc2%4%6%8%10%% of quoted contentdc
dc -3.5
0.7
1.1
2.1

b sc
sl
dl

a
sc
-6.1
1.4
5.6
-3.4

sl
-9.7
0.1
6.1
2.4

dl
-3.4
1.0
3.5
-3.0

table 4: surprise, sg(b|a), measures how much more likely
category b outlets are to cite quotes reported by a outlets, com-
pared to a hypothetical scenario where quoting is random.

where o(a) denotes the set of outbound edges in g with the outlet
node residing in a, and i(v) denotes the set of inbound edges in g
with v as the destination quote node. we will call mg(b|a) the
proportion-score of b given a.

the proportion-score is not directly informative of the quoting
pattern similarity since it is skewed by differences in relative sizes
of the outlets in each category. to account for these effects, we em-
pirically estimate how unexpected mg(b|a) is given the observed
degree distribution. we construct random graphs by rewiring the
edges of the original bipartite graph [23], such that for a large num-
ber of iterations we select edges u1     v1 and u2     v2 to re-
move, where u1 (cid:54)= u2 and v1 (cid:54)= v2, and replace these edges with
u2     v1 and u1     v2.

we use the randomly rewired graphs to build a hypothetical sce-
nario where quoting happens at random, apart from trivial outlet-
size effects. we can then quantify the deviation from this scenario
using the surprise measure, which we de   ned as follows. let r
denote the set of all rewired graphs; given the original graph g the
surprise sg(b|a) for categories a and b is:

sg(b|a) =

mg(b|a)     er   rmr(b|a)

(cid:112)varr   rmr(b|a)

.

in other words, surprise measures the average difference between
the proportion-score calculated in the original graph g, and the
one expected in the randomly rewired graphs, normalized by the
standard deviation. surprise is, therefore, an asymmetric measure
of similarity between the quoting patterns of outlets in two given
categories, that is not biased by the size of the outlets.
the surprise values between our four considered categories are
shown in table 4. a negative surprise score sg(b|a) indicates
(in units of standard deviation) how much lower the proportion of
quotes reported by outlets in a that are also cited by outlets by b
is than in a hypothetical scenario where quotes are cited at random.
for example, the fact that sg(dc|sc) is negative indicates that
declared conservative outlets are much less likely to cite quotes
reported by suspected conservative outlets than by chance, in spite
of their suspected ideological similarity. furthermore, we observe
that declared liberal outlets are actually disproportionately more
likely to cite quotes that are also reported by declared conservative
outlets, in spite of their declared opposing ideologies.

interestingly, for both categories of declared outlets, we    nd
a high degree of within-category heterogeneity in terms of quot-
ing patterns, with sg(dc|dc) and sg(dl|dl) being negative.
the reverse is true for suspected outlets: both sg(sc|sc) and
sg(sl|sl) have positive values that indicate within category ho-
mogeneity (e.g., suspected liberal outlets are very likely to cite
quotes that other suspected liberal outlets cite). these observations
bring additional evidence suggestive of the difference in nature be-
tween declared and suspected outlets.

method
quote popularity
+ outlet propensity
matrix completion

p
0.07
0.08
0.25

r
0.29
0.34
0.33

f1 mcc
0.12
0.14
0.27

0.11
0.13
0.28

table 5: classi   cation performance of matrix completion, com-
pared to the baselines in terms of precision, recall, f1 score and
matthew   s correlation coef   cient. bold scores are signi   cantly
better (based on 99% bootstrapped con   dence intervals).

summary. the surprise measure analysis not only con   rms that
there are systematic patterns in the underlying structure of the outlet-
to-quote graph, but also shows that these patterns go beyond a naive
liberal-conservative divide. in fact, as also shown by our analysis
of outlet and article characteristics, the declared-suspected distinc-
tion is often more salient. these results emphasize the limitation of
a naive supervised approach to classifying outlets according to ide-
ologies: the outlets which we can con   dently label as being liberal
or conservative are different in nature from those that we would
ideally like to classify. this motivates our unsupervised framework
for revealing the structure of political media coverage, which we
discuss next.

4. large-scale analysis

in this section we present a fully unsupervised framework for
characterizing media bias. importantly, this framework does not
depend on prede   ned dimensions of bias, and instead uncovers the
structure of political media discourse directly from quoting pat-
terns. in order to evaluate our model and con   rm the systematic-
ity of media coverage, we formulate the binary prediction task of
whether a source will pick up a quote. we then use the low-rank
embedding uncovered by our prediction method to analyze and in-
terpret the emerging principal latent dimensions of bias and char-
acterize them linguistically.

4.1 prediction: matrix completion

we attempt to model the latent dimensions that drive media cov-
erage in a predictive framework that we can objectively evaluate.
the task is to predict, for a given media outlet and a given quote
from a presidential speech, whether the outlet will choose to report
the quote or not.

formally, we de   ne x = (xij) to be the outlet-by-quote adja-
cency matrix such that xij = 1 if outlet i cites quote-cluster j and
xij = 0 otherwise. in our task, we leave out a subset of the entries,
and aim to recover them based on the other entries.

inspired by recommender systems that reveal latent dimensions
of user preferences and item attributes, we use a low-rank matrix
completion approach. by applying this methodology to news out-
lets and quotes, we attempt to uncover the dimensions along which
quotes vary and along which news outlets manifest their preference
for certain types of quotes.
baselines. we consider, independently, two baselines that do not
take media bias into account: the popularity of a quote   q
j = eixij
and the propensity of a news outlet to report quotes from presiden-
tial speeches,   s

i = ejxij (where e is the sample mean).

a simple hypothesis is that quotes are cited only based on their

newsworthiness, such that important quotes are cited more often:

  xij       q
j .

middle
motherjones.com
nypost.com
economist.com
macleans.ca
barrons.com

high
weaselzippers.us
patriotpost.us
hotair.com
freerepublic.com
thegatewaypundit.com
lonelyconservative.com whorunsgov.com
rightwingnews.com
patriotupdate.com
dailycaller.com
cnsnews.com
wnd.com
nationalreview.com
americanthinker.com
theblaze.com
iowntheworld.com
pjmedia.com
angrywhitedude.com
ace.mu.nu

low
news.com.au
news.smh.com.au
ottawacitizen.com
nationalpost.com
theage.com.au
canada.com
calgaryherald.com
edmontonjournal.com
aljazeera.net
vancouversun.com
brisbanetimes.com.au
montrealgazette.com
bbc.co.uk
thesun.co.uk
telegraph.co.uk
dailyrecord.co.uk
independent.co.uk

csmonitor.com
cbsnews.com
latimes.com
id98.com
villagevoice.com
salon.com
armytimes.com
democrats.org
tnr.com
rt.com
prnewswire.com
barackobama.com theglobeandmail.com

table 6: top-most, central and bottom-most news outlets ac-
cording to the second latent dimension.

positive class (quoting) occurring only about 1.6% of the time. in
order to evaluate our model in a binary decision framework, we use
matthew   s correlation coef   cient as the principal performance met-
ric. we tune the amount of id173    and the cutoff threshold
on the development set. the selected model has rank 3. table 5 re-
ports the system   s predictive performance on the test set. the latent
low-rank model signi   cantly outperforms both the quote popularity
baseline as well as the baseline including outlet propensity, show-
ing that the choices made by the media when covering political
discourse are not solely explained by newsworthiness and available
space. the performance of our model is twice that of the baselines
in terms of both f1 and matthew   s correlation coef   cient, and three
times better in terms of precision, con   rming that the latent quoting
pattern bias is systematic and structured. motivated by our results,
next we attempt to characterize the dimension of bias with a spec-
tral and linguistic analysis of the latent low-rank embedding.
4.2 low-rank analysis

armed with a low-rank space which captures the predictable
quoting behavior patterns of media, we attempt to interpret the la-
tent dimensions and gain insights about these patterns. this low-
rank space is given by the singular value decomposition (svd):

  x = u sv t ,

where the rows of u (respectively v ) embed outlets (respectively
quotes) in the latent space.

we start by looking at the mapping of the labeled outlets, as
listed in table 3, in the space spanned by the latent dimensions.
figure 4 shows that the    rst two latent dimensions cluster the out-
lets in interpretable ways. outlets with high values along the    rst
axis appear to be more mainstream, while outlets with lower values
more independent.9 along the second dimension, declared con-
servative outlets all have higher values than declared liberal out-
lets. international news outlets such as the bbc and al jazeera
have lower scores. going beyond our labeled outlets, we look in
detail at the projection of news outlets along this dimension in ta-
ble 6, showing the outlets with the highest and the lowest dimen-

9this characterization is maintained after rewiring the bipartite
graph in a way that controls for the number of quotes that each out-
let contributes to the data. this dimension is therefore not entirely
explained by outlet quoting propensity.

figure 4: projection of some of the media outlets onto the    rst
two latent dimensions. filled and colored markers are outlets
with self-declared political slant, such as the blaze and the na-
tion, while un   lled markers are more popular outlets for which
slants are suspected, such as fox news and the new york times.
grey circles are international news outlets such as bbc and
hindu times. marker sizes are proportional to the propensity
of quoting obama.

a step further is to also take into account the propensity of an

outlet to quote obama at all:

  xij       q

j +   s
i .

in a world without any media bias, this baseline would be very
hard to beat, since all outlets would cover the content proportion-
ally to its importance and to their own capacity, without showing
any systematic preference to any particular kind of content.
low-rank approximation. more realistically, there are multiple
dimensions that drive media coverage. to make use of this, we
search for a low-rank approximation   x       x, where   x is con-
structed as follows:

we start by taking into account quote frequency in the weighted

matrix   x = (  xij) de   ned as:

xij(cid:112)(cid:80) x:,j

.

  xij =

then, we build a row-normalized   x = (  xij):

  xij =

  xij
||   xi||2

.

we estimate   x as to best reconstruct the observed values (a),
while keeping the estimate low-rank by regularizing the (cid:96)1 norm of
its singular values, also known as its nuclear norm (b) [21]:

minimize   x

1
2

(cid:124)

||p   (   x)     p   (   x)||2

f

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(a)

(cid:125)

+   ||   x||   

(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)

(b)

,

where p    is the element-wise projection over the space of observed
values of   x. to solve the minimization problem, we use a fast
alternating least squares method [12].
results. we leave out 500,000 entries of the outlet-by-quote ma-
trix (out of 14.7 million) and divide them into equal development
and test sets. the class distribution is heavily imbalanced, with the

0.040.060.080.10.120.14first bias dimension   0.2   0.10.00.1second bias dimensionthe blazethe nationfox newsthe hindubbcny timesdeclared liberaldeclared conservativesuspected liberalsuspected conservativeforeignhigh

low

high

middle

low

first dimension of bias

the principle that people of all faiths are welcome in this country, and will not be treated differently by their government,
is essential to who we are.
the united states is not, and will never be, at war with islam. in fact, our partnership with the muslim world is critical.
at a time when our discourse has become so sharply polarized [...] it   s important for us to pause for a moment and
make sure that we are talking with each other in a way that heals, not a way that wounds.

tonight, we are turning the east room into a bona    de country music hall.
you guys get two presidents for one, which is a pretty good deal.
now, nothing wrong with an art history degree   i love art history.

second dimension of bias

those of you who are watching certain news channels, on which i   m not very popular, and you see folks waving tea
bags around...
if we don   t work even harder than we did in 2008, then we   re going to have a government that tells the american
people,    you   re on your own.   
by the way, if you   ve got health insurance, you   re not getting hit by a tax.

congress passed a temporary    x. a band-aid. but these cuts are scheduled to keep falling across other parts of the
government that provide vital services for the american people.
keep in mind, nobody is asking them to raise income tax rates. all we   re asking is for them to consider closing tax
loopholes and deductions.
the truth is, you could    gure out on the back of an envelope how to get this done. the question is one of political will.

by the end of the next year, all u.s. troops will be out of iraq.
we come together here in copenhagen because climate change poses a grave and growing danger to our people.
wow, we must come together to end this war successfully.

table 7: example quotes by president obama mapped to top two dimensions of quoting pattern bias.

sion score, as well as outlets in the middle. a post-hoc investigation
reveals that all the top outlets can be identi   ed with the conserva-
tive ideology. furthermore, some of the highest ranked outlets on
this dimension are self-declared conservative outlets that we did
not consider in our manual categorization from table 3, for ex-
ample weaselzippers.us, hotair.com and rightwingnews.com. the
region around zero, displayed in the second column of table 6,
uncovers some self-declared liberal outlets not considered before,
such as democrats.com and president obama   s own blog, barack-
obama.com, as well as some outlets that are often accused of having
a liberal slant, like cbsnews.com and latimes.com. finally, the out-
lets with the most negative scores around this dimension are all in-
ternational media outlets. given that our framework is completely
unsupervised, we    nd the alignment between the latent dimension
and ideology to be surprisingly strong.
4.3 latent projection of linguistic features

so far we have seen that there are systematic differences in the
quoting patterns of different types of media outlets. since all the
quotes we consider are from the same speaker, any systematic lin-
guistic differences that arise have the effect of portraying a differ-
ent persona of the president by different types of news outlets. by
choosing to selectively report certain kinds of quotes by obama,
outlets are able to shape their audience   s perception of how the
president speaks and what issues he chooses to speak about.

to characterize the effect of this selection, we make use of the
fact that the singular value decomposition of   x = u sv t pro-
vides not only a way of mapping news outlets, but also presidential
quotes to the aforementioned latent space. a selection of quotes
that map to relevant areas of the space (and that are cited at least
   ve times) is shown in table 7.

the quote embedding allows us to perform a linguistic analysis
of the presidential quotes and interpret the results in the latent bias
space. even though the latent representation is learned in a com-
pletely language-agnostic way (starting only from the outlet-quote
graph), we    nd important language-related aspects.
sentiment. we applied stanford   s sentiment analyzer [30] on the
presidential speeches and explore the relationship between the la-
tent dimensions and average sentiment of the paragraph surround-
ing the quote. we    nd a negative correlation between the sec-
ond dimension and sentiment values: the quotes with high values
along this dimension, roughly corresponding to outlets ideologi-
cally aligned as conservative, come from paragraphs with more
negative sentiment (spearman    =    0.32, p < 10   7). figure
5(a) shows how positive and negative sentiment is distributed along
the    rst two latent dimensions. a diagonal effect is apparent, sug-
gesting that outlets clustered in the international and independent
region portray a more positive obama, while more mainstream and
conservative outlets tend to re   ect more negativity from the presi-
dent   s speeches.
negation. we also study how the presence of lexical negation (the
word not and the contraction n   t) in a quote relates to the probabil-
ity of media outlets from different regions of the latent bias space
to cite that quote. while lexical negation is in some cases related
to sentiment, it also corresponds to instances where the president
contradicts or refutes a point, potentially relating to controversy.
figure 5(b) shows the likelihood of quotes to contain negation in
different areas of the latent space. the effect is similar: quotes with
negation seem more likely in the region corresponding to main-
stream conservative outlets, possibly because of highlighting the
controversial aspects in the president   s discourse.

(a) sentiment

(b) negation

(c) topics

figure 5: linguistic features projected on the    rst two latent dimensions: (a) sentiment of the quoted paragraphs; (b) proportion of
quotes that contain negation; (c) dominant topics discussed. refer to figure 4 for an interpretation of the latent space in terms of
media outlet anchors.

topic analysis. we train a topic model using latent dirichet al-
location [3] on all paragraphs from the presidential speeches. we
manually label the topics and discard the ones related to the non-
political    background    of the speeches, such as introducing other
people and organizing question and answer sessions. we construct
a topic   quote matrix t = (tij) such that tij = 1 if the paragraph
surrounding quote j in the original speech has topic i as the domi-
nant topic,10 and 0 otherwise. we scale t so that the rows (topics)
sum to 1, obtaining   t , which we then project to the svd latent
space introduced earlier by solving for lt in   t = lt sv t . since
v is orthonormal, the projection is given by lt =   t v s   1. fig-
ure 5(c) shows the arrangement of the dominant topics in the latent
space. quotes about the troops and war veterans are ranked on the
top of the second dimension, corresponding to more conservative
outlets, while    nancial and healthcare quotes occupy the other end
of the axis. healthcare is distanced from other topics on the    rst
axis, suggesting it is a topic of greater interest to mainstream news
outlets rather than the more focused, independent media.
lexical analysis. we attempt to capture a    ner-grained linguistic
characterization of the space by looking at salient words and bi-
grams. we restrict our analysis to words and bigrams occurring in
at least 100 and at most 1000 quotes. we construct a binary bag-
of-words matrix w where (wij) = 1 iff. word or bigram i occurs
in quote j. same as with topics, we scale the rows of w (cor-
responding to word frequency) to obtain   w and project onto the
svd latent space as lw =   w v s   1. among the words that are
projected highest on the    rst axis, we    nd republicans, cut, de   cit
and spending. among the center of the ranking we    nd words and
phrases such as    nancial crisis, foreign oil, solar, small business,
and bin laden. the phrase chemical weapons also appears near
the middle, possibly as an effect of liberal outlets being critical of
the decisions former bush administration. on the negative end of
the spectrum, corresponding to international outlets, we    nd words
such as countries, international, relationship, alliance and country
names such as iran, china, pakistan, and afghanistan.

overall, the mapping of linguistic properties of the quotes in the
latent bias space is surprisingly consistent, and suggest that out-

10we de   ne a topic to be dominant if its weight is larger by an arbi-
trary threshold than the second highest weight. we manually label
the topics using the ten most characteristic words.

lets in different regions of this space consistently portray different
presidential personae to their audience.

5. further related work
media bias. our work relates to an extensive body of literature   
spanning across political science, economics and communication
studies   that gives theoretical and empirical accounts of media bias
and its effects. we refer the reader to a recent comprehensive sur-
vey of media bias [26], and focus here on the studies that are most
relevant to our approach.
selection patterns. several small-scale studies investigate subjects
that media outlets select to cover by relying on hand annotated slant
labels. for instance, by tracing the media coverage of 32 hand-
picked scandal stories, it was shown that outlets with a conservative
slant are more likely to cover scandals involving liberal politicians,
and vice-versa [27]. another study [2] focuses on the choices that
   ve online news outlets make with respect to which stories to dis-
play in their top news section, and reports that conservative outlets
show signs of partisan    ltering. in contrast, by relying on an unsu-
pervised methodology, our work explores selection patterns in data
involving orders of magnitude more selector agents and items to be
selected. closer to our approach are methods that show political
polarization starting from linking patterns in blogs [1] or from the
structure of the retweet graph in twitter [5]. these approaches op-
erate on a prede   ned liberal-conservative dimension, and assume
available political labels. furthermore, the structure they exploit
does not directly apply to the setting of news media articles.
language and ideology. recently, natural language processing
techniques were applied to identify ideologies in a variety of large
scale text collections, including congressional debates [14, 24],
presidential debates [19], academic papers [15], books [29], and
twitter posts [4, 33, 34]. all this work operates on a prede   ned
dimension of conservative   liberal political ideology using known
slant labels; in the news media domain slant is seldom declared or
proven with certainty and thus we need to resort to an unsupervised
methodology.
quote tracking. recent work has focused quoting practices [31]
and on the task of ef   ciently tracking and matching quote snippets
as they evolve, both over a set period of time [16], as well as over

0.0060.0080.010.0120.014first bias dimension   0.02   0.010.000.010.02second bias dimension   0.30   0.150.000.150.300.0060.0080.010.0120.014first bias dimension0.00.20.40.60.81.00.001570.001590.001610.001630.00165first bias dimension012345second bias dimension1e   4hardshiptroops and veteransenergynationhealthcaregovernmentfinanceforeign policytaxeswar and terrorismcongresseducationan longer, variable period of time [32]. we adapt this task in order
to news article quotes with presidential speech segments and build
our outlet-to-quote graph.

6. conclusion

we propose an unsupervised framework for uncovering and char-
acterizing media bias starting from quoting patterns. we apply this
framework to a dataset of matched news articles and presidential
speech transcripts, which we make publicly available together with
an online visualization that can facilitate further exploration.

there is systematic bias in the quoting patterns of different types
of news sources. we    nd that the bias goes beyond simple news-
worthiness and space limitation effects, and we objectively quan-
tify this by showing our model to be predictive of quoting activ-
ity, without making any a priori assumptions regarding the dimen-
sion of bias and without requiring labeling of the news domains.
when comparing the unsupervised model with self-declared polit-
ical slants, we    nd that an important dimension of bias is roughly
aligned with an ideology spectrum ranging from conservative, pass-
ing through liberal, to the international media outlets.

by selectively choosing to report certain types of quotes by the
same speaker, the media has the power to portray different personae
of the speaker. thus, an audience only following one type of me-
dia may witness a presidential persona that is different from the
one portrayed by other types of media or from what the president
tries to project. by conducting a linguistic analysis on the latent
dimensions revealed by our framework, we    nd that differences go
beyond topic selection, and that mainstream conservative outlets
portray a persona that is characterized by negativism, both in terms
of negative sentiment and in use of lexical negation.
future work. throughout our analysis, we don   t take into account
potential changes in a media outlet   s behavior over time. modeling
temporal effects could reveal idealogical shifts and differences in
issue framing.

furthermore, natural language techniques can be better tuned to
insights from political science in order to produce tools and re-
sources more suited for analyzing political discourse [10]. for in-
stance, exploratory analysis shows that state-of-the-art sentiment
analysis tools fail to capture subtle nuances in political commen-
tary and we expect that    ne-grained opinion mining can achieve
this better [17].

finally, news sources often take the liberty of skipping or alter-
ing certain words when quoting. while these changes are often
made to improve readability, we speculate that systematic patterns
in such edits could uncover different dimensions of media bias.

acknowledgements
we would like to acknowledge the valuable input provided by math-
ieu blondel, flavio chierichetti, justin grimmer, scott kilpatrick,
lillian lee, alex niculescu-mizil, fabian pedregosa, noah smith
and rebecca weiss. we are also thankful to the anonymous re-
viewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. this re-
search has been supported in part by a google faculty research
award, nsf iis-1016909, nsf iis-1149837, nsf iis-1159679,
nsf cns-1010921, darpa smisc, boeing, facebook, spinn3r,
volkswagen, and yahoo.

7. references
[1] l. a. adamic and n. glance. the political blogosphere and
the 2004 us election: divided they blog. in proceedings of
linkdd, 2005.

[2] m. a. baum and t. groeling. new media and the

polarization of american political discourse. political
communication, 25(4):345   365, 2008.

[3] d. m. blei, a. y. ng, and m. i. jordan. latent dirichlet

allocation. journal of machine learning research,
3:993   1022, 2003.

[4] r. cohen and d. ruths. classifying political orientation on

twitter: it   s not easy! in proceedings of icwsm, 2013.

[5] m. d. conover, b. goncalves, j. ratkiewicz, a. flammini,
and f. menczer. predicting the political alignment of twitter
users. ieee xplore, pages 192   199, 2011.

[6] r. j. dalton, p. a. beck, and r. huckfeldt. partisan cues and

the media: information    ows in the 1992 presidential
election. american political science review, pages 111   126,
1998.

[7] j. t. gasper. shifting ideologies? re-examining media bias.

international quarterly journal of political science,
6(1):85   102, 2011.

[8] m. gentzkow and j. shapiro. what drives media slant?
evidence from u.s. daily newspapers. econometrica,
78(1):35   71, 2010.

[9] m. gentzkow and j. m. shapiro. ideological segregation

online and of   ine. national bureau of economic research,
2010.

[10] j. grimmer and b. m. stewart. text as data: the promise

and pitfalls of automatic content analysis methods for
political texts. political analysis, 21(3):267   297, 2013.

[11] t. groseclose and j. milyo. a measure of media bias. the
quarterly journal of economics, 120(4):1191   1237, 2005.

[12] t. hastie, r. mazumder, j. lee, and r. zadeh. matrix
completion and low-rank svd via fast alternating least
squares. arxiv preprint arxiv:1410.2596, 2014.

[13] d. e. ho. measuring explicit political positions of media.

quarterly journal of political science, 3(4):353   377, 2008.

[14] m. iyyer, p. enns, j. boyd-graber, and p. resnik. political

ideology detection using id56s. in
proceedings of acl, 2014.

[15] z. jelveh, b. kogut, and s. naidu. detecting latent ideology
in expert text: evidence from academic papers in economics.
in proceedings of emnlp, 2014.

[16] j. leskovec, l. backstrom, and j. kleinberg. meme-tracking
and the dynamics of the news cycle. in proceedings of acm
kdd, 2009.

[17] j. li and e. hovy. id31 on the people   s daily.

in proceedings of emnlp, 2014.

[18] m. liberman. multiplying ideologies considered harmful.

language log, 2005.

[19] w.-h. lin, e. xing, and a. hauptmann. a joint topic and
perspective model for ideological discourse. in machine
learning and knowledge discovery in databases, pages
17   32. springer berlin heidelberg, 2008.

[20] y.-r. lin, j. p. bagrow, and d. lazer. more voices than ever?

quantifying media bias in networks. in proceedings of
icwsm, 2011.

[21] r. mazumder, t. hastie, and r. tibshirani. spectral

id173 algorithms for learning large incomplete
matrices. journal of machine learning research,
11:2287   2322, 2010.

[22] l. morales. distrust in u.s. media edges up to record high.

gallup politics, 2010.

[23] m. e. newman, s. h. strogatz, and d. j. watts. random

graphs with arbitrary degree distributions and their
applications. physical review e, 64(2):026118, 2001.

[24] v.-a. nguyen, j. boyd-graber, and p. resnik. lexical and

hierarchical topic regression. in proceedings of nips, 2013.
[25] j. s. peake. presidents and front-page news: how america   s

newspapers cover the bush administration. the harvard
international journal of press/politics, 12(4):52   70, 2007.
[26] a. prat and d. str  mberg. the political economy of mass

media. in advances in economics and econometrics: tenth
world congress. cambridge university press, 2013.

[27] r. puglisi and j. m. snyder. newspaper coverage of political

scandals. the journal of politics, 73(03):931   950, 2011.

[28] a. j. schiffer. assessing partisan bias in political news: the

case(s) of local senate election coverage. political
communication, 23(1):23   39, 2006.

[29] y. sim, b. acree, j. h. gross, and n. a. smith. measuring

ideological proportions in political speeches. in proceedings
of emnlp, 2013.

[30] r. socher, a. perelygin, j. y. wu, j. chuang, c. d. manning,

a. y. ng, and c. potts. recursive deep models for semantic
compositionality over a sentiment treebank. in proceedings
of emnlp, 2013.

[31] s. soni, t. mitra, e. gilbert, and j. eisenstein. modeling

factuality judgments in social media text. in proceedings
of acl (short papers), 2014.

[32] c. suen, s. huang, p. ekscombatchai, and j. leskovec.

nifty: a system for large scale information    ow tracking and
id91. in proceedings of www, 2012.

[33] s. volkova, g. coppersmith, and b. van durme. inferring
user political preferences from streaming communications.
in proceedings of acl, 2014.

[34] f. m. f. wong, c. w. tan, s. sen, and m. chiang.

quantifying political leaning from tweets and retweets. in
icwsm, 2013.

