spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

5
1
0
2

 
l
u
j
 

1
3

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
0
5
0
0

.

8
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract. using the sswl database of syntactic parameters of world languages, and the mit
media lab data on language interactions, we construct a spin glass model of language evolution.
we treat binary syntactic parameters as spin states, with languages as vertices of a graph, and
assigned interaction energies along the edges. we study a rough model of syntax evolution, under
the assumption that a strong interaction energy tends to cause parameters to align, as in the
case of ferromagnetic materials. we also study how the spin glass model needs to be modi   ed to
account for entailment relations between syntactic parameters. this modi   cation leads naturally
to a generalization of potts models with external magnetic    eld, which consists of a coupling at the
vertices of an ising model and a potts model with q = 3, that have the same edge interactions. we
describe the results of simulations of the dynamics of these models, in di   erent temperature and
energy regimes. we discuss the linguistic interpretation of the parameters of the physical model.

1. introduction

the evolution of languages through the interaction of their speakers is a topic of interest to
computational linguists and, like many interacting many-body problems, is di   cult to study an-
alytically. in this paper we follow an approach that views languages at the level of syntax, with
syntactic structures encoded as a string of binary syntactic parameters, a point of view originating
in the principles and parameters model of generative linguistics, [4], [5] (see also [1] for a more
expository account). it is known that syntactic parameters can change in the course of language
evolution. cases of parameter    ipping have been identi   ed in the historical development of some
indo-european languages, see for example [22]. for recent results on language evolution from the
point of view of syntactic parameters, see [10].

we construct a model for language evolution inspired by the physics of spin glasses. these
are systems of interacting spin variables, with spins located at the vertices of a graph and with
interaction energies along the edges that tend to favor alignment (ferromagnetic) or anti-alignment
(anti-ferromagnetic) of the spin variables at the endpoints of each edge. the dynamics of the
system also depends on thermodynamic temperature parameter, which is a measure of disorder in
the system, so that the spin variables tend to be frozen onto the ground state at low temperature,
while higher energy states become accessible to the dynamics at higher temperature.

we interpret each syntactic parameter as a spin variable, on a graph representing world lan-
guages and their interaction. we obtain the binary values of the syntactic parameters from the
syntactic structures of the world   s languages (sswl) database1, which documents these values
for 111 syntactic parameters and over 200 natural languages. to model the interaction strengths
between languages, we use data from the mit media lab2, by de   ning the strength of the in   u-
ence of language a on language b as the likelihood that two languages are to be co-spoken. in
particular, in their database, two languages are connected when users that edit an article in one
wikipedia language edition are signi   cantly more likely to also edit an article in another language
edition. the frequency of such occurrences provides an estimate of the strength of the interaction.

1http://sswl.railsplayground.net/
2http://language.media.mit.edu/visualizations/wikipedia

1

2

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

the idea of modeling syntactic parameters as spin variables in a statistical mechanical setting
is not entirely new to computational linguistics. a model based on this idea was proposed in
[20]. the main di   erence with respect to the approach we follow here is that, in the model of
[20], the vertices of the graph are individual speakers in a    xed population, rather than languages
(populations of speakers) as in our model. a statistical physics model of language change based
on syntactic parameters was also constructed in [3].

1.1. general assumptions of the model. we make a series of simplifying assumptions, to the
purpose of obtaining a computationally feasible model. we will examine the plausibility of these
assumptions and their interpretation from a linguistics point of view.

first, we assume that the languages we simulate are su   ciently distinct and never converge and
do not concern ourselves with, for example, whether a dialect of language a is truly distinct from
language a or whether two closely related languages a and b will at some point just become the
   same    language. instead, we assume there exists a de   nition of a language for which the notion
of distinct languages is precise and for which the languages we have identi   ed are always distinct.
the second simpli   cation we make is that for a given syntactic parameter, such as the    subject-
verb    syntax, a language either has it or does not have it. one could account for    ner syntactical
structures by considering syntaxes of arbitrary length, but this would still admit a binary classi-
   cation over the languages.

a third assumption is that because language interaction occurs microscopically by human in-
teraction, and a foreign language is easier to acquire if its syntax is familiar, interacting languages
will generally prefer to align their syntactic parameters. from these assumptions, we construct a
hamiltonian and evolve the system from its current syntactic parameter state toward equilibrium.

1.2. discussion of assumptions. considering languages as    discrete    objects (as opposed to
a continuum of dialects) is a rather common linguistic assumption. alternative models, such as
wave models of transmission of linguistic changes are also possible (see for example [18]), but we
will not consider them in this paper. it would be interesting to see whether statistical physics
methods could be relevant to wave models of languages, but that is outside the purpose of our
present investigation.

the second assumption listed above is clearly more problematic: it is a drastic simpli   cation,
which ignores phenomena of entailment between syntactic parameters. indeed, it is well known
that there are relations between di   erent syntactic parameters, while our assumption leads us
to treat them as independent spin variables. for example, there are pairs of parameters (p, p(cid:48))
with the property that if p = +1 then p(cid:48) is unde   ned, while if p =    1, then p(cid:48) can take either
value   1: see [15], [16] for some explicit examples of this entailment behavior. thus, in a more
re   ned version of the model, the second assumption above should be modi   ed in two ways: (1) an
additional possible value 0 of the parameters should be introduced, which accounts for the case
where a parameter is unde   ned; (2) relations between parameters should be introduced modeling
the entailment property described above. the    rst modi   cation simply corresponds, in spin glass
models, to considering potts models with number of possible spin states q = 3, instead of ising
models with q = 2 (see [21] for a survey of the mathematical properties and di   erences between
these models), while the second modi   cation requires relations (at the vertices of the graph)
between di   erent spin variables (syntactic parameters) and can be modeled on versions of potts
models with external magnetic    elds, [9]. we will    rst consider the simpler version of the model,
with the second assumption as listed above, and then discuss the e   ect of introducing modi   cations
as indicated here. the case with entailment of parameters is discussed in   5. a simple modi   cation
of the entailment model of   5 also account for variants of the entailment relation (see [15], [16])

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

3

where p =    1 implies p(cid:48) unde   ned, and p = +1 implies p(cid:48) =   1, or where the parameter p2 in
entailed by more than one parameter. the latter case requires the coupling at vertices of more
than two spin glass models. we will focus on only one case for simplicity.

regarding the third assumption, since our model of interaction energies for the spin glass system
is based on measures of bilingualism, as obtained by media lab, the evolution of syntactic param-
eters that we describe would be best understood, linguistically, within the context of the theory of
bilingual code-switching, [17]. for example, as observed in the study of [23] of english   spanish
bilingual population, the language spoken by this population    acquires    the pro-drop parameter
(which is +1 in spanish but    1 in english) in the sense that spanish verbs inserted in english
sentences retain their pro-drop form from spanish. in the evolution of syntactic parameters we
obtain from the spin glass simulation, we see previously inactive    1 parameters switch to the
activated form +1 as an e   ect of    ferromagnetic    alignment with the corresponding parameters
of nearest neighbor vertices. in a realistic model, this should be interpreted (at least in a    rst
phase of language evolution) in the sense of code-switching theory, as imported forms from the
neighboring languages that are inserted in the original syntactic structure, while retaining their
parameters activated.

finally, we should comment on our overall choice of describing languages in terms of syntactic
parameters, within the principles and parameters setting of [4], [5]. while this framework can
been criticized, see for example [11], it is clear that coding syntactic structures as a string of binary
variables makes it extremely suitable for modeling via statistical physics methods, hence it is a
very natural setting for our purposes. we proceed to a more detailed description of the model in
the coming section.

2. spin glass model

the general data of a spin glass model (potts model) consist of a    nite graph g; a    nite set a
of possible spin states at a vertex, with #a = q; a set    = maps(v (g), a) of possible states of the
system, namely assignments of a spin state in a at each vertex in v (g); a set of interaction energies
associated to the edges e     e(g). usually the energies are assumed to be equal to zero is the
spins at the endpoints v        (e) are not aligned and equal to a value    je if they are aligned. the
   ferromagnetic    case corresponds to the assumption that all je     0 and the    antiferromagnetic   
case corresponds to            je     0. one often expresses the interaction energies in terms of edge
variables te = e  je     1, where    is a thermodynamic parameter (an inverse temperature).
in the ising model case, where spin variables have two possible values   1, a typical form of the
hamiltonian of a spin glass model is, for states s       
(2.1)

h(s) =     (cid:88)

je svsv(cid:48)     (cid:88)

bv sv,

e   e(g):   (e)={v,v(cid:48)}

v   v (g)

where b = (bv) is an external magnetic    eld: the    rst term measures the degree of alignment
between nearby spins and the second the alignment of spins with the direction of the overall
external    eld. when we allow for more general potts model cases, where the spin variables have
q     2 possible values, hamiltonian (2.1) is rewritten as

h(s) =     (cid:88)

e   e(g):   (e)={v,v(cid:48)}

je   sv,sv(cid:48)     (cid:88)

bv sv.

v   v (g)

(2.2)

the partition function of the system is

(2.3)

zg(  ) =

exp(     h(s)),

(cid:88)

s     

4

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

and the associated gibbs id203 measure is

(2.4)

pg,  (s) =

e     h(s)
zg(  )

.

for more general cases, and a more detailed mathematical discussion see [9], [21]. in particular,
one can    t into this model the case where there are two di   erent interaction energies je (cid:54)= j  e
associated to the two opposite orientations of e, by doubling all edges in the graph, so as to
consider both orientations, with respective energies je and j  e. this case will be relevant to our
application.

2.1. topology and energetics of the system. with these simpli   cations and resources, the
stage is set to map the problem onto a classical statistical mechanics problem. we identify each
language with the vertex of a digraph, and each interaction of the form language a in   uences
language b with a directed edge from vertex a to vertex b. such an edge has a weight or interaction
strength jab given by the aforementioned metric used by mit media lab. note that in general,
jab (cid:54)= jba.
we represent the presence or absence of a particular syntactic parameter by associating with
each vertex a spin-1/2 variable, where a spin of +1/2 indicates the former and    1/2 represents the
latter. for simplicity, in the following we just use either +1 or    1 for the two possible spin states,
as described above, referring to them as    spin-up    and    spin-down   , respectively, absorbing a
factor of 1/2 into the term j(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48). the physical analog of this setup is the association of a particle
with spin attributes to each vertex and inter-particle interactions with the edges, the usual setting
of ising models in statistical physics.

the full speci   cation of the con   guration of the system in the single-particle (single-language)

basis is then given by

(2.5)

|(cid:126)s(cid:105) =

(cid:32)(cid:79)

(cid:96)   l

(cid:79)

p   p

| (cid:126)sp(cid:105) =

|s(cid:96),p(cid:105)

(cid:33)

(cid:79)

p   p

where s(cid:96),p     {   1, +1}, p is the set of all parameters, and l is the set of all languages.

with this picture in mind, we turn to the evolution. in this tensor product basis, we can simulate
the evolution of each of the 111 syntactic parameters, in the independent parameters approxima-
tion, by endowing the system with an interacting hamiltonian for each syntactic parameter:

(2.6)

j(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)s(cid:96),ps(cid:96)(cid:48),p.

hp =     (cid:88)

(cid:96),(cid:96)(cid:48)   l

this hamiltonian is minimized by the alignment of adjacent spins, as j(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)     0    (cid:96), (cid:96)(cid:48). note that
this is not the most general form of spin glass models, where the hamiltonian typically contains
additional disorder terms. we are also not considering here the possible presence of terms playing
the role of an external magnetic    eld b, as in (2.3).

2.2. dynamics and equilibrium physics. we now need to impart dynamics into the model
by introducing    uctuations or thermal noise. continuing in the physical analogy, this system at
thermal equilibrium with a    heat bath    at temperature t will have a distribution of con   gurations
speci   ed by the id203 density function

(2.7)

p(| (cid:126)sp(cid:105)) =

1

z(  )

exp(     hp(| (cid:126)sp(cid:105)))

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

5

where z is the id172 or partition function

(2.8)

z(  ) =

exp(     hp(| (cid:126)sp(cid:105)))

(cid:88)

{| (cid:126)sp(cid:105)}

and    = t    1 an inverse temperature parameter (or (kbt )   1 in physics, with kb the boltzmann
constant).

once again, let us translate this to linguistics. the temperature t de   nes the extent to which
languages are    noisy    due to external factors (the heat bath); if they are individually very noisy,
then we can expect that these    uctuations will, on average at equilibrium, result in no overall
alignment of a syntactic parameter (magnetization of zero). in this limit, the languages    uctuate
independently. on the other hand, at t = 0, all of the noise is frozen out, so the system will
be found only in the con   guration with the largest id203 as per equation (2.7). that is the
ground state, or the state with minimum hp, in which all languages either possess or lack a given
parameter (magnetization of   1).

2.3. temperature parameter. we comment more in detail here on the interpretation, in lin-
guistics, of the temperature parameter of the spin glass model. as we mentioned above, we want
to interpret that as a heat bath that introduces a certain level of noisiness in the behavior of
the parameters. in linguistics, a new probabilistic approach to syntactic parameters was recently
developed in [14].
it makes a strong case, based on an analysis of treebanks of di   erent sizes
for a sample of 20 languages, for viewing the syntactic parameters of a given language not as
frozen on the up or down position,   1, but as a binary id203 distribution {p, 1     p}, which
expresses the tendency of the language of have a given syntactic parameter expressed or not. for
example, the case of the head-initial structure is analyzed in [14] and it is shown that languages
typically tend to express elements of both   1 possibilities for this parameters, with a certain
id203. similar results are obtained, in the same paper, for subject-verb, object-verb, and
adjective-noun parameters.

in the light of this approach, we can regard each language (cid:96), and each parameter p, as endowed
with the additional data of id203 distributions {p(cid:96).p, 1     p(cid:96),p}, which represent how    noisy   
the setting of the parameter p is in the language (cid:96).
in general, one expects that the id203 distributions {p(cid:96).p, 1     p(cid:96),p} will be di   erent for
di   erent languages (cid:96) and di   erent parameter p. however, we can assume that they all depend on
an overall thermodynamic parameter    that can be tuned to increase or decrease the amount of
noise. in    rst approximation, one can assume for simplicity that all probabilities are the same,
with a form like p(cid:96),p(  ) = p (  ) = 1     e     
2 , so that, at zero temperature (   =    ) the parameter p
is set to +1 without any noisiness (or to    1 in the symmetric case), while for t         (at    = 0)
one has the maximum amount of noise, with the uniform distribution p = 1/2 assigning equal
id203 to the two   1 values of the syntactic parameter.

one can consider more general functions p(cid:96),p(  ), which are continuous and monotonically inter-
polating between the values p(cid:96),p(   ) = 1 and p(cid:96),p(0) = 1/2. for example, one can slightly modify
the case discussed above by taking p(cid:96),p(  ) = 1     e
, where the exponents   (cid:96),p should be    tted
to data like those collected in [14], so that there is some common value   0 at which the id203
distribution p(cid:96),p(  0) match the statistics for speci   c syntactic parameters in speci   c languages.
unfortunately, at present, we do not have a su   ciently large set of data, of the type collected in
[14], to fully implement this analysis, so we only outlined here the general approach.

       (cid:96),p

2

6

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

2.4. variant of the model: entailment of parameters. in the form of the spin glass model
described here above, we made the overall simplifying assumption of treating all syntactic param-
eters as mutually independent and uncoupled. thus, the spin glass model is simply an uncoupled
collection of many independent ising models, with the same underlying graph topology and inter-
action energies, one for each parameter p.

this    independent parameters assumption    is the most problematic. phenomena of entailment
of parameters are well known, see [15], [16] for speci   c examples. in such cases, what typically
happen is that one or more parameters depend on the setting of another parameter (or more). as
a typical example, we can take the case of two parameters (p1, p2) with the property that, if the
parameter p1 is activated (set to +1 value) in a language (cid:96), then the second parameter p2 can take
either value +1 or    1, while if p1 is set to    1, then the parameter p2 is just unde   ned in that
language. several such examples, in the family of indo-european languages, are reported in the
table of syntactic parameters given in table a, figure 1, in the appendix of [15]. we will focus
on the analysis of one such example in   5.

in addition to the entailment problem, a more general problem, which is less well understood, is
whether there are other dependencies between di   erent syntactic parameters, and what would con-
stitute a minimal number of independent binary variables. this is part of the general critique that
is addressed at the principles and parameters model, [11]. for the purpose of the present paper,
we will ignore this further problem, and we will assume that, except for the entailment phenomena
described above, the syntactic parameters can be considered independent and uncoupled.

2.5. comparison with other models. a statistical physics model of id146 and
language evolution was developed in [3]. their model is also based on the principles and parame-
ters approach. however, the statistical physics model they construct is signi   cantly di   erent from
the one we describe in the present paper. they are mostly interested in modeling language ac-
quisition. they model by a gibbs state the id203 with which a speaker selects sentences, so
that the choice should follow euphonic considerations: how best a given sentence    ts the prosodic
patterns of the language. to this purpose, they model id144 as a potential, which de   nes
the hamiltonian of the gibbs state. the grammar is then estimated by a maximum likelihood
argument maximizing the gibbs id203 measure.
another linguistic application of statistical physics models, and in particular of the ising spin
glass model, occurs in   13.6.2   13.6.3 of [20]. this is a model of language evolution, where the
author considers a population of linguistic agents, corresponding to the vertices of the graph, with
edges representing the interaction between individual agents. the model also assumes that there
are two distinct languages in the population. the adoption of one or the other language by a given
speaker corresponds to the two possible spin states   1 at that vertex in the spin glass system.
the inverse temperature parameter of the ising model is interpreted as the id203 with which
speakers of each language produce    cues    (in a cue-based learning algorithm). the behavior of
the system then models a situation where, above a certain critical temperature, individual agents
behave independently and both languages are equally represented in the population, while below
a critical temperature one language becomes dominant.

to our knowledge, a model like ours, where the syntactic parameters themselves are treated as
spin variables in a spin glass model, and interactions are modeled by bilingualism data, has not
been previously considered.

3. computational approach

having established the equilibrium physics expected of a spin glass model of syntax, we seek to
explore the evolution of the system computationally. naively exploring the con   guration space is

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

7

figure 1. initial state of the subject-verb parameter for various languages in the
database. most languages currently possess this syntax (value +1 of the parameter,
red colored vertices). graph built on mit media lab data of language interaction.

computationally too expensive, so instead we employed a id115 simulation
to propagate stochastically an initial con   guration of syntactic parameter values (as speci   ed by
the sswl) toward equilibrium, through the metropolis algorithm, see for instance [12], [19].

the algorithm (see, for instance,   2 and 3 of [19]) is based on the detailed balance condition

(3.1)
where p(s     s(cid:48)) is the id203 of transitioning from a state s to a state s(cid:48), represents the
condition that p(s) is the stationary distribution of a markov process with transition probabilities

p(s)p(s     s(cid:48)) = p(s(cid:48))p(s(cid:48)     s),

8

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

figure 2. in the low temperature regime t = 0.000001 equilibrium, all of the
languages are expected to acquire the subject-verb parameter in the +1 position.

p(s     s(cid:48)). uniqueness of the stationary distribution follows from an ergodicity property of the
markov process, usually implied by conditions of aperiodicity and positive recurrence.

in the metropolis   hastings algorithm, a markov process with the required properties is con-

structed by obtaining transition probabilities p(s     s(cid:48)) in terms of acceptance-rejection rates:
(3.2)
where   (s     s(cid:48)) is the id155 of proposing a state s(cid:48) given the state s and
  a(s     s(cid:48)) is the id155 of accepting the proposed state s(cid:48) given s. the p(s     s(cid:48))
are normalized to add up to one, by requiring that, in the remaining cases the proposed state is

p(s     s(cid:48)) =   a(s     s(cid:48))      (s     s(cid:48)),

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

9

figure 3. in the high temperature regime t = 20 equilibrium for the subject-
verb parameter, all vertices have local magnetization close to zero, with half of
them approaching zero from the positive direction.

s(cid:48) = s. the usual metropolis   hastings choice of the acceptance distribution is

(3.3)

  a(s     s(cid:48)) = min{1,

p(s(cid:48))   (s(cid:48)     s)
p(s(cid:48))   (s     s(cid:48))

}

which satis   es the balance condition (3.1)

  a(s     s(cid:48))
  a(s(cid:48)     s)

p(s(cid:48))   (s(cid:48)     s)
p(s(cid:48))   (s     s(cid:48))

.

=

10

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

figure 4. average (over vertices) value of spin, in the low temperature regime
t = 0.000001 (left) and in the high temperature range t = 20 (right), as a function
of the number of steps in the monte carlo simulation.

the selection probabilities   (s     s(cid:48)) in the metropolis   hastings algorithm are chosen so that
the ergodicity condition holds. in the case where the graph is a lattice, this is usually achieved
by considering single-spin-   ip dynamics, where in each allowed transition s     s(cid:48) the    nal state
s(cid:48) di   ers from the initial state s by the    ipping of a single spin. on these possible states, the
id203 is taken to be uniform,   (s     s(cid:48)) = 1
probabilities   a(s     s(cid:48)) that satisfy the detailed balance condition (3.1) is given by setting

in the case where p is the gibbs measure of a spin glass model, a choice of the acceptance

n , with n the number of allowed states.

  a(s     s(cid:48)) =

1

(3.4)
namely, a new state s(cid:48) with energy lower than or equal to that of s is automatically accepted,
while one with a higher energy is accepted with id203 exp(     (h(s(cid:48))     h(s))). see   3.1 of
[19] for more details.

exp(     (h(s(cid:48))     h(s)))

if h(s(cid:48))     h(s)     0
if h(s(cid:48))     h(s) > 0.

(cid:26)

3.1. ergodicity and metropolis   hastings algorithm. the ergodicity property is necessary
for the working of the metropolis   hastings algorithm. a markov chain is ergodic if and only if it
is irreducible and aperiodic. irreducibility is the condition that the markov process can reach any
possible state of the system starting from any given state in a    nite number of steps. a state is
periodic if the chain can return to it only at multiples of some period d > 1. aperiodicity is the
absence of periodic states (d = 1 for all states). under the assumption of single-spin-   ip dynamics,
ergodicity is satis   ed for the ising model on a lattice (see   3.1 of [19]).

the graph we consider here is not a lattice. however, it makes sense in terms of the linguistic
interpretation of the model, to assume a similar type of single-spin-   ip dynamics. for similar
arguments in favor of single-spin-   ip dynamics in models of id146 and evolution,
see [20]. ergodicity of the metropolis   hastings algorithm, with the single-spin-   ip dynamics, still
holds for our graph. the following simple argument applies more generally.

irreducibility can be checked using the notion of accessibility. given states s and s(cid:48), let   
denote the minimum number of steps needed for the markov chain to reach s(cid:48) starting at s. the

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

11

state s(cid:48) is accessible from s if there is a positive id203 that    <    . suppose that the
states s and s(cid:48) di   er at a certain set a     v (g) of sites, with k = #a and n = #v (g). then
p(   <    )     p(   = k). let la be the set of all k! orderings of the elements of a. for j = 1, . . . , k!,
and   j     la, let sj = (sj,r)r=0...,k   1 be the corresponding list of k states in   , each obtained from
the previous one by    ipping the spin located at the site   j(r)     a. the id203 p(   = k)
is then the sum of the products of the id203 of obtaining a string   j in la by choosing
uniformly randomly a sequence of k elements in v (g), times the product of the probabilities of
the    ipping of the individual spins at the sites   j(r) for r = 1, . . . , k,

p(   = k) =

1
n !

  a(sj,r     sj,r+1).

k!(cid:88)

k   1(cid:89)

j=1

r=0

the precise values of these probabilities depends on the topology of the graph g, through the
set of edges, that determine the change in energy between successive states, according to (3.4).
it is however cleat that p(   = k) > 0, hence all states are accessible from a given one, which is
equivalent to the irreducibility condition for the markov chain.

for a single parameter, the set   p of possible states has #  p = 2#v (g). the number of states
s(cid:48)
p that are accessible from a given state sp, in a single-spin-   ip dynamics, is the number of states
that di   er from sp by    ipping a single spin at one of the vertices. hence, for any given sp, there
are n = #v (g) accessible states s(cid:48)
p. the id203 of choosing one of these states is uniform
p) = 1/n . for a given state sp, we have p(sp     sp) = 0 if and only if all the accessible
  (sp     s(cid:48)
p with   (sp     s(cid:48)
states s(cid:48)
p) = 1 and
p} = 0. thus, states s with p(sp     sp) = 0 are
maxima of the energy. all other states sp have p(sp     sp) > 0, hence they are aperiodic states
of the markov chain. if a markov chain is irreducible then all states have same period, hence the
remaining states must also be aperiodic. together with irreducibility this implies ergodicity.

p) = 1/n > 0 have lower energy, so that all   a(sp     s(cid:48)

p(sp     sp) = 1    (cid:80)

p) = 1     1

p(sp     s(cid:48)

n #{s(cid:48)

s(cid:48)

p

thus, if we focus on the behavior of a single syntactic parameter, we simply have a ising
model on our graph of languages g, with given interaction energies, and we apply the metropolis   
hastings algorithm as above. when we consider more than one parameter at the same time, so
that states are of the form (cid:126)sp, under the simplifying assumption that di   erent syntactic parameters
are independent of each other, we just run the same kind of metropolis   hastings algorithm on
each parameter, by each time    ipping a single spin sp of a single parameter p. namely, we proceed
as described above, using the metropolis   hastings algorithm with single-spin-   ip dynamics. we
propagate a state st     st+1 by proposing a con   guration | (cid:126)sp(cid:105) and accepting it, st+1 = | (cid:126)sp(cid:105), or
rejecting it, st+1 = st, with some id203. to simplify the noise, we assume it acts by trying
to    ip the spin at each vertex independently, although in reality this is more likely to occur in
clusters. at each step, the algorithm chooses a vertex at random and tries to    ip its spin, accepting
or rejecting the    ip according to (3.4):

(3.5)

  a(st     st+1 = | (cid:126)sp(cid:105)) =

1

exp(        hp)

if    hp     0
if    hp > 0.

(cid:26)

propagating the state for many steps produces a distribution of con   gurations that asymptot-
ically approaches equation (2.7), allowing one to calculate thermal averages of various functions
(such as magnetization) by evaluating them on the state at each step and averaging over steps.

3.2. model with entailment. we now discuss how one can adapt the previous computational
setting to the more re   ned model that also takes into consideration dependencies and entailment
of syntactic parameters.

12

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

the    rst modi   cation in the model consists of the fact that we use, for each parameter, a
set of three possible values {   1, 0, +1} instead of the binary values {  1}, thus allowing for the
possibility that a parameter may be unde   ned (by e   ect of the values of other parameters). thus,
instead of the ising model, we are looking at a potts model with q = 3. the natural generalization
of the metropolis dynamics of the ising model is the wider class of glauber dynamics on graphs,
where the single-spin-   ip dynamics is replaced by the assumption that each move changes the
parameter value at just one vertex, by choosing a possible value uniformly at random.
consider again the situation described in   2.4, where we have two parameters (p1, p2) with the
property that, if the parameter p1 = +1 then the parameter p2 can take values   1, while if the
parameter p1 =    1 then p2 is unde   ned. as before, we associate spin variables sp1 and sp2 to
the two parameters, but now we assume that sp1 has two possible spin states {  1}, as before,
while sp2 has three possible spin states, {+1, 0,   1}, with 0 for the case when the parameter is
unde   ned.

thus, we see that, in order to accommodate the entailment relations, we need to construct a
multivariable spin glass model, where some of the spin variables associated to the vertices behave
like an ising model (with number of spin states q = 2), while other variables behave like a potts
model (with number of spin states q = 3).

moreover, the entailment relation should be modeled by additional interaction terms in the
hamiltonian, that couple the variables sp1 and sp2, in such a way that the con   gurations with
sp1 = 1 and sp2 =   1, and with sp1 =    1 and sp2 = 0 are favored energetically over all the other
possible combinations.

this leads us into a new class of spin glass model, which to our knowledge has not been con-
sidered in physics so far, where di   erent spin variables, with di   erent numbers of spin states
coexist on the same graph and are coupled with one another. we describe a possible choice of an
interaction term that achieves the desired result.
we focus on a case with only two parameters p1, p2 with an entailment relation as above. let
s(cid:96),p be the spin variables, as before, where s(cid:96),p1     {  1} and s(cid:96),p2     {  1, 0}. we consider a change
of variable for the    rst spin, with the new variable x(cid:96),p1     {0, 1} de   ned by s(cid:96),p1 = exp(  ix(cid:96),p1).
this just corresponds to the two possible choices of representing the group z/2z in the additive
form {0, 1} or in the multiplicative form {+1,   1}. we also associate to the spin variables s(cid:96),p2    
{+1, 0,   1} a variable y(cid:96),p2 = |s(cid:96),p2|     {0, 1}.

we then consider a hamiltonian given by the sum of two terms h = he + hv , where the term
he expresses the edge interactions between di   erent languages, as in (2.6), written in the potts
model form (2.2)

(cid:17)

j(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)

  s(cid:96),p1 ,s(cid:96)(cid:48),p1

+   s(cid:96),p2 ,s(cid:96)(cid:48),p2

,

(cid:16)

he = hp1 + hp2 =     (cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:96),(cid:96)(cid:48)   languages

(cid:88)

hv =

hv,(cid:96) =

j(cid:96)   x(cid:96),p1 ,y(cid:96),p2

.

where we treat the two parameters as independent, while the interaction between the parameters
due to the entailment relation is encoded in the hv term as

(3.6)

(3.7)

(cid:96)

(cid:96)

for j(cid:96) > 0, this gives an anti-ferromagnetic pairing between the variables x(cid:96),p1 and y(cid:96),p2.

the preferred energy states for the hamiltonian hv are those where either x(cid:96),p1 = 0 and
y(cid:96),p2 = 1, or x(cid:96),p1 = 1 and y(cid:96),p2 = 0, which correspond, respectively, to the entailment relations
s(cid:96),p1 = 1 and s(cid:96),p2 =   1, or s(cid:96),p1 =    1 and s(cid:96),p2 = 0. notice that the size of the parameters j(cid:96) in
the term hv in the hamiltonian determine how strongly enforced the entailment relation is in a
given language: for j(cid:96)        , an in   nite energy barrier separates the ground states hv,(cid:96) = 0 from

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

13

the excited states hv,(cid:96) = j(cid:96), hence the entailment is strongly enforced, while lower values of j(cid:96)
would imply that the language (cid:96) admits a certain frequency of exceptions to this syntactic rule.
these should be interpreted in the same sense as the probabilistic approach to setting syntactic
parameters discussed in [14], see also the discussion in   2.3 above.

notice that, if we freeze one of the parameter p1 and only consider the evolution of the second
parameter, then the hamiltonian above can be regarded simply as a case of potts model with
external magnetic    eld.

we then run the analog of the metropolis   hastings algorithm for the hamiltonian h = he +hv
on the graph of languages and language interactions. since we now have spin variables with more
than two possible states, instead of the single-spin-   ip dynamics one uses the appropriate glauber
dynamics. for general results about ergodicity and convergence time of glauber dynamics on
some classes of graphs, we refer the reader to [2], [8]. in the simple case we analyze in   5 below,
we will work with a complete graph, so the results of [8] apply.

3.3. implementation. part of the implementation consisted of parsing and converting the sswl
database of syntactic parameters in a form usable for data analysis. additionally, discrepan-
cies in nomenclature between the mit media lab topology source and the sswl database
had to be identi   ed and manually resolved. the implementation for the independent parame-
ters simulation was executed in matlab. the implementation for the entailment of parame-
ters was executed in java. the source    les of the code are available at the github repository:
https://github.com/pointofnoreturn/spin_glass_model

4. independent parameters dynamics

as a    rst simulation, we consider all parameters as independent spin variables, hence we can
focus on just one parameter at a time and run a single-parameter simulation. we report here
the case of the subject-verb parameter as an illustrative example: we describe the behavior
at low and high temperature t , averaging over a million steps. this is enough to obtain a clear
understanding of the phase diagrams of simulations for all of the other parameters, when considered
independently. the code in the github repository can be used to generate analogous simulations
for all parameters.
the ratio t /(cid:104)j(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)(cid:105) is very small or, respectively, very large.
4.1. subject-verb parameter. the initial state speci   ed by the sswl is given in figure 1,
where the vertices are represented as circular nodes colored red if the language possesses the
parameter or blue if it lacks the parameter. the sizes of the vertices do not signify anything in
these graphs: variable sizes are only used for ease of visualization.

here, when we refer to the    low    and    high    temperature regimes, we mean the range in which

figure 1 suggests that the vast majority of languages currently possess this parameter in the
activated form +1. evolving this system at very low temperature (t = 0.000001), we want to
know the local magnetization, or the thermal average of the spin value at each vertex. since we
are in the low temperature regime, we expect that the vertices will tend to orient their spins in
the same direction (either all of the languages will tend to possess the parameter or will lack it).
marking vertices with (cid:104)s(cid:96),p(cid:105)h > 0 red and vertices with (cid:104)s(cid:96),p(cid:105)h < 0 blue, we can look at a graph
of these languages at equilibrium, given in figure 2.

as expected, since the system is close to t = 0, it is also close to the ground state. in fact, a
con   guration randomly sampled from the equilibrium ensemble will also look like figure 2 nearly
100% of the time, because of how dominant the all-up con   guration is: it is nearly impossible at
low t for the state to propagate to a con   guration that is not the ground state. at t = 0, this is

14

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

the only con   guration in the ensemble. at this low temperature, the languages quickly converge
during their evolution to a state in which they all acquire the parameter in the activated form +1.
a more physical way to view this is to look at a plot of the average spin as a function of time, as
given in the    rst graph of figure 4.

one may wonder why this system always ends up in this    all-up    state instead of an    all-down   
state. the key is that the initial con   guration is dominated by spin-up vertices, so the energy
barrier is much higher for a droplet of spin-down to expand and dominate the system than it is
for the sea of spin-up to swallow the droplets.

what happens when t is very large? taking t = 20, the local magnetizations approach zero,
with exactly half of the vertices approaching zero from the positive direction as in figure 3. in
fact, the local magnetizations vary with mean    2.3927   10   4 and median 7   10   6 on the interval
[   0.0186, 0.0147].

in this case, a con   guration picked at random from the equilibrium ensemble is most likely to
have approximately half of the vertices with spin up. because t is large, a state can propagate
to almost any other con   guration fairly easily. at equilibrium, the languages here evolve approx-
imately independently of each other, so the average (over vertices) spin    uctuates about zero, as
in the second graph of figure 4.

there are then two points to note: the model behaves as predicted, and it is marked by the
same symmetry-breaking phase transition observed in the 2d ising ferromagnet at a critical
temperature. this is not surprising, since this model is at its core just a ferromagnet with a more
complicated topology.

5. model with entailment of parameters

we consider here a simple case where we focus on two parameters with an entailment relation,
over a small set of indo-european languages. in this case, we take the data on the values of the
syntactic parameters from [15], [16], while we still use the same data from the mit media lab
database for the interaction strengths between di   erent languages. in this simulation we used the
media lab data based on book translations instead of wikipedia editing3.

we consider, for example two parameters p1, p2 expressing de   niteness (respectively, number 7
and 12 in the list in table a of [15]). the    rst parameter p1 expresses partial de   niteness, while
the parameter p2 is de   niteness checking. see for instance [7] for a discussion of the role of these
parameters. we consider three languages: english, russian, and bulgarian. we input interaction
energies taken from the same mit media lab data graph, and we neglect the e   ect of interaction
with other languages. the initial con   guration of the two parameters, taken from table a of [15]
is according to the following table:

p2
p1
(cid:96)1 +1    1
(cid:96)2    1
0
(cid:96)3 +1 +1

our second example considers another pair of parameters p1, p2, given, respectively, by strong
deixis and strong anaphoricity (numbers 52 and 53 in table a of [15]). for a detailed discussion
of deixis see [13], while regarding anaphoricity, see for instance [6]. in this example, we work with
the complete graph on four vertices (tetrahedron graph), where the vertices (cid:96)1, . . . , (cid:96)4 correspond
to the languages: english, welsh, russian, and bulgarian. notice that, according to the media
lab graph, the interaction energies between the pairs welsh/russian and welsh/bulgarian are

3http://language.media.mit.edu/visualizations/books

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

15

figure 5. average value of spin for p1 = partial de   niteness (left) and for
p2 = de   niteness checking (right) in the high temperature/high energy (ht/he)
regime (top) and in the low temperature/high energy (lt/he) regime (bottom), as
a function of the number of steps in the monte carlo simulation.

negligible compared to the other interaction energies. the initial con   guration, from table a of
[15], for this pair of parameters and these four languages is the following:

p1
p2
(cid:96)1 +1 +1
(cid:96)2    1
0
(cid:96)3 +1 +1
(cid:96)4 +1    1

5.1. entailment dynamics. we ran a simulation of the dynamics of the system for two entailed
parameters p1, p2, with hamiltonian h = he + hv , where he and hv are given, respectively, by
(3.6) and (3.7), in the case of the two examples described above.

in this simulation, we replaced the acceptance probabilities (3.4) with
if    h     0
if    h > 0.

  a(s     s    1 (mod 3)) =

exp(        h)

(5.1)

(cid:26) 1

where

   h := min{h(s + 1 (mod 3)), h(s     1 (mod 3))}     h(s).

the dynamics depends on two parameters, the temperature and the coupling energy of the
entailment relation. we ran simulations for high/low temperature and high/low entailment energy.

16

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

figure 6. average value of spin for p1 = partial de   niteness (left) and for
p2 = de   niteness checking (right) in the high temperature/low energy (ht/le)
regime (top) and in the low temperature/low energy (lt/le) regime (bottom), as
a function of the number of steps.

in the    rst case, for the graph with languages {(cid:96)1, (cid:96)2, (cid:96)3} = {english, russian, bulgarian} and
the parameters {p1, p2} = {partial de   niteness, de   niteness checking}, we consider an initial
state as given in the    rst table above. the average value of spin for the two parameters is
illustrated in figures 5 and 6, in the di   erent regimes of high temperature and high entailment
energy (ht/he), high temperature and low entailment energy (ht/le), low temperature and
high entailment energy (lt/he), low temperature and low entailment energy (lt/le). the    nal
equilibrium states for the dynamics, in each of these cases, would then be as follows:

(p1, p2) ht/he ht/le lt/he lt/le
(+1, +1)
(+1, +1)
(+1, +1)

(+1, +1)
(+1, +1)
(   1, +1)

(+1, +1)
(+1, 0)
(   1, 0)

(   1, 0)
(   1, 0)
(   1, 0)

(cid:96)1
(cid:96)2
(cid:96)3

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

17

figure 7. average value of spin for p1 = strong deixis (left) and for p2 =
strong anaphoricity (right) in the ht/he regime (top) and the lt/he regime
(bottom), as a function of the number of steps.

in the second case, with languages {(cid:96)1, (cid:96)2, (cid:96)3, (cid:96)4} = {english, welsh, russian, bulgarian} and
with parameters {p1, p2} = {strong deixis, strong anaphoricity}, the initial state is given by the
values of the parameters in the second table above, and the average value of spin in the di   erent
ht/he, ht/le, lt/he, lt/le regimes is illustrated in figures 7 and 8. the    nal equilibrium
states for the dynamics are then of the form

(p1, p2) ht/he ht/le
(+1,   1)
(   1,   1)
(   1, +1)
(   1,   1)

(+1, 0)
(+1,   1)
(   1, 0)
(+1, +1)

(cid:96)1
(cid:96)2
(cid:96)3
(cid:96)4

lt/he
(+1, +1)
(+1, +1)
(+1, +1)
(+1, +1)

lt/le
(+1,   1)
(+1,   1)
(   1, 0)
(   1, 0)

these examples are only illustrative and not entirely realistic, because we have singled out a
small portion of the language graph that exhibits an interesting con   guration of entailed param-
eters in the initial state, and we have run the simulation neglecting the interactions with all the
other languages in the rest of the larger language graphs, which will also a   ect the behavior of
the system. these examples, however, are interesting because they show situations where a con-
   guration of entailed parameters reaches an equilibrium states where parameters of the individual
languages have undergone some changes, but have not always converged to a con   guration where
all the parameters are aligned. while in the    rst example one obtains complete alignment of all

18

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

figure 8. average value of spin for p1 = strong deixis (left) and for p2 =
strong anaphoricity (right) in the ht/le regime (top) and the lt/le regime
(bottom), as a function of the number of steps.

the parameters in the low temperature and low energy regime, in the second example, even in
this range, parameters do not fully align. this shows that the presence of entailment between
syntactic parameters can have a substantial e   ect on the dynamics that di   ers signi   cantly in
outcome from the case where one assumes an independence hypothesis on parameters.

6. conclusions and further questions

in this paper, we introduced a new tool to study the    ow of syntactic parameters by mapping
the problem onto a spin glass model. this tool provides some    exibility, as one could provide any
topology and any adjacency matrix. we have shown that, under a hypothesis of independence
between syntactic parameters, in the evolution of the system parameters tend to align to the
+1 position. we related this to linguistic models of bilingual code-switching. we also showed
that, when entailment relations between parameters are taken into account, the uncoupled ising
models are replaced by a coupling at the vertices of ising and potts models with same edge
interactions. one obtains then more complicated equilibrium con   gurations, depending on the
entailment energy parameter, which gives the strength of the coupling, and its relation to the
   temperature    parameter. even in the low energy and low temperature regime one    nds cases
that do not yield a complete alignment of parameters.

one factor not accounted for in this project was the number of speakers for each language, which
could signi   cantly change the interaction strengths. another interesting scenario would involve
disordering terms in which two interacting languages actually prefer to antialign their parameters.

spin glass models of syntax and language evolution

19

an overall hypothesis of this model is that the interaction energies along the edges, which are
modeled on estimates of the size of the bilingual population, remain constant during the evolution.
in a realistic model, the strength of the interaction would also be co-evolving. it is also likely that
factors such as the existence of better and more e   cient automated translators will eventually
cause drastic changes in the size of human bilingual or multilingual populations, so the feasibility
of such models of linguistic evolution may also be altered by external factors of this sort.

acknowledgment. this work was performed as part of the activities of the last author   s math-
ematical and computational linguistics lab and cs101/ma191 class at caltech. the last author
is partially supported by nsf grants dms-1201512 and phy-1205440.

references

[1] m. baker, the atoms of language, basic books, 2001.
[2] n. berger, c. kenyon, e. mossel, y. peres, glauber dynamics on trees and hyperbolic graphs, probab. theory

related fields 131 (2005) n. 3, 311   340.

[3] m. cassandro, p. collet, a. galves, c. galves, a statistical-physics approach to id146 and

language change, physica a: statistical mechanics and its applications, vol.263 (1999) 427   437.

[4] n. chomsky, lectures on government and binding, dordrecht: foris publications, 1982.
[5] n. chomsky, h. lasnik, the theory of principles and parameters, in    syntax: an international handbook of

contemporary research   , pp.506   569, de gruyter, 1993.

[6] p. cole, inde   niteness and anaphoricity, language, vol. 50 (1974) n.4, part 1, 665   674.
[7] a. cornilescu, a. nicolae, on the syntax of romanian de   nite phrases: changes in the patterns of de   nite-

ness checking, in    the noun phrase in romance and germanic   , pp.193   221, john benjamins, 2011.

[8] p. cu   , j. ding, o. louidor, e. lubetzky, y. peres, a. sly, glauber dynamics for the mean-   eld potts model,

j. stat. phys. 149 (2012) 432   477.

[9] j.a. ellis-monaghan, i. mo   att, the tutte-potts connection in the presence of an external magnetic    eld,

adv. in appl. math. 47 (2011) no. 4, 772   782.

[10] c. galves (ed.) parameter theory and linguistic change, oxford university press, 2012.
[11] m. haspelmath, parametric versus functional explanations of syntactic universals, in    the limits of syntactic

variation   , pp. 75   107, john benjamins, 2008.

[12] w. krauth, statistical mechanics: algorithms and computations, oxford university press, 2006.
[13] f. lenz, deictic conceptualisation of space, time, and person, john benjamins publishing, 2003.
[14] h. liu, dependency direction as a means of word-order typology: a method based on dependency treebanks,

lingua, 120 (2010) 1567   1578.

[15] g. longobardi, c. guardiano, evidence for syntax as a signal of historical relatedness, lingua, 119 (2009)

1679   1706.

[16] g. longobardi, c. guardiano, g. silvestri, a. boattini, a. ceolin, towards a syntactic phylogeny of modern

indo-european languages, journal of historical linguistics, vol.3 (2013) n.1, 122   152.

[17] j. macswan, grammatical theory and bilingual codeswitching, mit press, 2014.
[18] j. nerbonne, measuring the di   usion of linguistic change, phil. trans. r. soc. b (2010) vol. 365, 3821   3828.
[19] m.e.j. newman, g.t. barkema, monte carlo methods in statistical physics, oxford university press, 1999.
[20] p. niyogi, the computational nature of language learning and evolution, mit press, 2006.
[21] a.d. sokal, the multivariate tutte polynomial (alias potts model) for graphs and matroids, in    surveys in

combinatorics 2005   , 173   226, london math. soc. lecture note ser., 327, cambridge univ. press, 2005.

[22] a. taylor, the change from sov to svo in ancient greek, language variation and change, vol.6 (1994)

1   37.

[23] e. woolford, bilingual code-switching and syntactic theory, linguistic inquiry, vol.14 (1983) n.3, 520   536.
[24] sswl database of syntactic parameters:

http://sswl.railsplayground.net/

20

karthik siva, jim tao, matilde marcolli

division of physics, mathematics, and astronomy, california institute of technology, 1200

e. california blvd, pasadena, ca 91125, usa

e-mail address: ksiva@caltech.edu
e-mail address: jtao@caltech.edu
e-mail address: matilde@caltech.edu

