6
1
0
2

 
b
e
f
8

 

 
 
]
i
s
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
6
6
2
0

.

2
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

the happiness paradox: your friends are happier than

you.

johan bollen1,3    bruno gonc  alves2, ingrid van de leemput1,3, and guangchen ruan1

1indiana university, bloomington in

2center for data science, new york university, new york, ny.
3wageningen university, 6700 aa, wageningen, the netherlands

   to whom correspondence should be addressed; e-mail: jbollen@indiana.edu

most individuals in social networks experience a so-called friendship para-

dox: they are less popular than their friends on average. this effect may

explain recent    ndings that widespread social network media use leads to re-

duced happiness. however the relation between popularity and happiness is

poorly understood. a friendship paradox does not necessarily imply a hap-

piness paradox where most individuals are less happy than their friends. here

we report the    rst direct observation of a signi   cant happiness paradox in a

large-scale online social network of 39, 110 twitter users. our results reveal

that popular individuals are indeed happier and that a majority of individu-

als experience a signi   cant happiness paradox. the magnitude of the latter

effect is shaped by complex interactions between individual popularity, hap-

piness, and the fact that users cluster assortatively by level of happiness. our

results indicate that the topology of online social networks and the distribution

of happiness in some populations can cause widespread psycho-social effects

1

that affect the well-being of billions of individuals.

introduction we are a profoundly social species (1). the ability to establish face-to-face,

physical relationships in a rich social environment is paramount to our happiness and individ-

ual well-being (2   4). however, technology is now playing an increasing role in forming our

networks of social relationships. nearly 1/7th of the world   s population and over 2/3rd of the

us population (5) now use some form of social media which enables individuals to maintain

virtual social networks that extend well beyond geographical, economic, cultural, and linguistic

boundaries.

evidence has been accumulating that online social networking is associated with elevated

levels of loneliness, anxiety, displeasure, and dissatisfaction (6   9). the reason for this apparent

contradiction is unknown, but it may be found in universal social network connectivity patterns.

surprisingly, measured in number of connections, most people will have fewer friends than their

own friends do on average (10   12). this phenomenon, commonly referred to as the friendship

paradox, has been attributed to an inherent structural bias in social network that favors popular

individuals: they are by de   nition more likely to belong to someone   s social circle, thereby

elevating local levels of popularity. if individuals equate popularity with prestige and compare

their own popularity to that of their friends this may lead to increased levels of dissatisfaction

(see fig.1).

the effects of this friendship paradox may extend beyond popularity. if popular individuals

tend to be happier, their elevated happiness will become more prevalent as well. this may in

turn lead to a happiness paradox (11, 13, 14), where most individuals are less happy than their

friends on average (see fig.1). in fact, the latter will contribute more directly to the negative

psycho-social effects of social networking, since it affects how individuals assess their own

subjective well-being, i.e. general happiness or life satisfaction (15, 16), relative to that of

2

others (17,18). at this point however it has not been established whether (1) popular individuals

are indeed happier and (2) a happiness paradox does in fact occur in social networks. given the

magnitude of social media adoption these are questions of global importance that may affect

the well-being of billions of individuals.

figure 1: a1: most social networks are characterized by very skewed degree distributions:
a few individuals have very many connections, while most individuals have few connections.
the number of connections are marked within each node. those with many connections are by
de   nition more likely to be someone   s friend. as a result their higher number of connections can
increase the average degree of given friendship neighborhoods throughout the network (marked
above each node) leading to a friendship paradox (red nodes) in which most individuals nodes
are less popular than the average of their friends. a2: when popular individuals are also more
likely to be happy, their happiness becomes more prevalent, raising average happiness levels
throughout the friendship circles in the network. a happiness paradox may result in which most
individuals are less happy than their own friends on average. individuals may cluster based on
their happiness or even the degree to which they experience a happiness paradox.

here we present the    rst large-scale longitudinal study of happiness and popularity levels

for a network of 39,110 twitter users that are connected by    friendship    relations (see materials

and methods). we automatically assess each individuals    subjective well-being (swb), on a
scale of [   1, +1] (see materials and methods), by applying a subjective id31
algorithm to their 3, 200 most recent time-coded tweets (19). their    happiness    (quanti   ed

as swb) along with their    popularity    (quanti   ed as their number of in-network friends) is

used to determine: 1) the fraction of individuals that has lower popularity than their friends

on average (ppop), 2) the fraction of individuals that has lower happiness than their friends

on average (phap), and,    nally, 3) the correlation between individual happiness and popularity

3

ppop
fhapp

null-model

r(happiness, popularity)

value (%) and 95% ci
94.3%, [93.7, 94.9] n=5,000
58.5%, [57.2, 59.8] n=5,000
50.1%, [49.4, 50.8] n=20,000
0.109, [0.076, 0.140] n=5,000

table 1: magnitude of friendship paradox, happiness paradox (compared to null-model pro-
duced by randomly re-assigning sbw values across all subjects), and happiness-popularity
correlation coef   cient (pearson   s r) for all subjects (n=39,110).

(r(happiness, popularity)).

with these de   nitions, a friendship or happiness paradox for our sample is indicated by

ppop and phap values larger than 50%, i.e. a majority of individuals have lower popularity or

happiness than their friends on average. to assess the correlation between happiness and pop-

ularity we simply calculate pearson   s r correlation between the swb values and log(degree)

of all subjects in our cohort. the use log(degree) is meant to compensate for the very skewed

distribution of degree values in our network.

the distribution of subjects and friendship relations in our social network is very unequal,

so we assess the robustness of our results by performing a id64 procedure in which

we randomly sample 10% of subjects and their network connections with replacement 5,000

times to assess the distribution of our paradox indicators for different samples of our network.

furthermore, we validate the statistical signi   cance of our results by comparing them to a null-

model where we reshuf   e the swb values across all individuals in our network. in this way,

we are able to maintain the same identical distribution of swb values and network structure,

while completely eliminating any possible correlation that might be present. the null-model

was bootstrapped 20,000 times and, as expected, it eliminated the happiness paradox.

as shown in table 1, we    nd that ppop = 94% indicating a very signi   cant friendship

paradox across all subjects, meaning that the great majority of users are less popular than their

4

friends are on average. we also    nd a modest but robust value of phap = 59%, indicating

the presence of a happiness paradox. hence a majority of subjects is indeed less happy than

their friends on average. our null-model indicates the absence of a happiness paradox when

the effects of network structure on happiness levels are removed by random re-assignment.

the lower magnitude of the happiness paradox could result from the rather low yet robust

correlation between happiness and popularity (spearman   s r = 0.100).

the distribution of individual happiness levels and mean neighborhood happiness in our

sample is distinctly bi-modal. this is congruent with the observed distribution of subjective

well-being across several cultures and nations (20). as shown in fig. 2 this bi-modality also oc-

curs at the level of our friendship network which separates subjects into 2 distinct groups: happy

subjects with happy friends (the    happy    group) and unhappy subjects with unhappy friends

(the    unhappy    group). this result follows earlier reports of happiness being homophilic or

assortative in social networks (19,21,22). since a happiness paradox speci   cally compares in-

dividual happiness to the average happiness of one   s friends, this homophilic bi-modality must

be factored into our analysis. by performing a separate analysis for happy and unhappy groups

of users, we attempt to equalize the effects of neighbor happiness across the two groups.

as shown in fig. 2 we use a gaussian mixture model (gmm) to demarcate our happy

and unhappy groups. we determine the location and distribution of two separate gaussian

components in the distribution of individual happiness vs. mean friend happiness (see suppl.

mat.) and demarcate both groups by simply determining whether a subject and its neighbors fall

within 2 standard deviations from the center of one of the components (indicated by 2 ellipses

in fig. 2). note that this procedure assumes a gaussian density distribution which roughly

matches the quantiles of the empirical density as shown by the contour lines of fig. 2.

we re-run our analysis for the happy and unhappy groups separately. the results are sum-

marized in figs. 2 and 3.

5

figure 2: (b1) happiness paradox: distribution of individual happiness (x-axis) vs. average
happiness of one   s friend   s average (y-axis). happiness is measured in terms of longitudinal
subjective well-being (swb) scores. subjects above the red paradox line experience lower
happiness (swb) than their friends    average. the distribution of swb scores places a majority
of subjects well above the diagonal paradox line. ellipses indicate the boundaries of 2 gaussian
mixture model components used to demarcate a happy (red) and unhappy (blue) groups of
subjects. paradox magnitudes are expressed in terms of the percentage of users who experience
lower happiness than their friends. the 95% con   dence intervals are calculated by a 5000-fold
id64 of a 10% sample to determine the sensitivity of our results to random network
sampling variations. (b2) and (b3) friendship paradox: distribution of individual popularity
(x-axis) vs. average popularity of one   s friends (y-axis). popularity is measured in terms of
log(degree) in the friendship network. subjects above the red paradox line experience lower
popularity than their friends on average. as shown, we    nd signi   cant happiness and friend-
ship paradoxes for all users, but happy users experience a stronger friendship paradox whereas
unhappy users experience a stronger happiness paradox.

6

figure 3: top: estimated pearson   s r correlation coef   cients (95% con   dence intervals in
brackets) between individual happiness (subjective well-being) vs. individual popularity (log
degree) for all subjects: 0.109 [0.077, 0.140], happy group: 0.126 [0.081, 0.171], and un-
happy group: -0.047 [-0.08, -0.013] . middle: distribution of friendship paradox values
for all subjects 0.943 [0.937, 0.949], happy group: 0.958 [0.951, 0.964], and unhappy group
0.888 [0.869, 0.906]. bottom: distribution of happiness paradox values for all subjects: 0.585
[0.581, 0.589], happy group: 0.578 [0.573, 0.582], and unhappy group 0.666 [0.657, 0.674].

these results reveal that the happy group experiences a strong friendship paradox but a

weak, yet very robust happiness paradox. the unhappy group experiences a weaker friend-

7

ship paradox, but a signi   cantly stronger happiness paradox than the happy group, in spite of

subjects being surrounded by less happy friends.

to determine whether the strong happiness paradox for the unhappy group, in spite of

its lower correlation between popularity and happiness, may be related to interpersonal ef-

fects, such as contagion or increased homophily, we examine the relation between individual

happiness and the average happiness of one   s neighbors. as indicated by the distribution of

individuals in fig. 2, the strength of the relationship between a subjects    happiness and the

average happiness of their friends differs signi   cantly between the happy and unhappy group.

a id75 analysis indicates that individual happiness and average friends    happiness

are more strongly related within the unhappy group (b=+0.9439, f=2.222e+05, p<0.001) than

within the happy group (b=+0.4459, f=34665, p<0.001). this result suggests that unhappy

users are more strongly affected by the lower happiness of their friends, possibly explaining

why this group exhibits a stronger happiness paradox in the absence of a strong correlation

between popularity and happiness.

conclusion

this work constitutes the    rst direct measurement of a happiness paradox in social networks,

rather than its theoretical derivation from hypothetical network attributes and properties. our

results suggest that previous observations of decreased happiness among social media users may

result directly from a widespread in   ated perception of the happiness of one   s friends. although

happy and unhappy groups of subjects are both affected by a signi   cant happiness paradox,

unhappy subjects are most strongly affected. this is counter-intuitive for two reasons. first, the

correlation between happiness and popularity is lowest for individuals in the unhappy group.

a happiness paradox can result from a friendship paradox when popularity and happiness are

correlated, since more popular and thus more prevalent individuals will increase the average

8

happiness of one   s circle of friends. as a result, the unhappy group, with the lowest correlation

between popularity and happiness, should experience the lowest happiness paradox. second, the

strong assortativity of happiness in our social network reduces the prevalence of happy subjects

in the social network circle of unhappy subjects. therefore, it should be easier for individuals

in this group to surpass the average happiness of their friends. our results show that neither

is the case. a possible explanation may lie in the stronger relation between the happiness of

individuals in this group and the overall happiness of their friends. this effect may point to an

alternate origin for the occurrence of a happiness paradox; instead of resulting from the greater

prevalence of popular and happy individuals, in some cases, a happiness paradox may result

from the complex social interactions between individuals and their friends, e.g. through mood

contagion (23   25) and potentially verbal commiseration and mirroring.

our study has limitations. first, the assessment of subjective well-being from social media

using text analysis algorithms may not be perfectly reliable. however, given the large number

of individuals in our dataset, no indication of consistent directional bias, and the magnitudes

of the observed effects, we expect this will not affect the validity of our observations. future

improvements in sentiment and mood analysis, and ground truth obtained from user surveys,

may increase the reliability of our swb estimates. second, given the large role that social media

plays in the social lives of billions of individuals, we expect that these environments may induce

longitudinal changes in the public   s social behavior and may over time alter the very nature of

social relations themselves (26). further analysis will be required to determine the extent and

signi   cance of these changes, and how they affect the propensity of online users to experience

the effects of a friendship and happiness paradox over time.

in spite of these limitations our results provide a strong indication that widespread social

media use may lead to increased levels of social dissatisfaction and unhappiness since individ-

uals will be prone to unfavorably compare their own happiness and popularity to that of others.

9

happy social media users will likely think their friends are much more popular and slightly

happier than they are while unhappy social media users will likely have unhappy friends that

will still seem much happier and more popular than they are on average. we caution against

the widespread use of social media given the likelihood that it decreases the happiness and

well-being of particularly the most vulnerable groups in society.

acknowledgements

bg thanks the moore and sloan foundations for support as part of the moore-sloan data sci-

ence environment at nyu.

references and notes

1. c. l. apicella, f. w. marlowe, j. h. fowler, n. a. christakis, nature 481, 497 (2012).

2. r. dunbar, neurosci biobehav review 34, 260 (2010).

3. a. steptoe, a. shankar, p. demakakos, j. wardle, proceedings of the national academy of

sciences 110 (2013).

4. s. pinker, the village effect: why face-to-face contact matters (atlantic books, 2015).

5. a. perrin, report: pew research center (2015).

6. m. burke, c. marlow, t. lento, proceedings of the sigchi conference on human factors

in computing systems, chi    10 (acm, new york, ny, usa, 2010), pp. 1909   1912.

7. e. kross, et al., plos one 8, e69841 (2013).

8. m. tromholt, m. lundby, k. andsbjerg, m. wiking, the facebook experiment: does social

media affect the quality of our lives?, tech. rep., the happiness institute (2015).

10

9. l. mitchell, m. r. frank, k. d. harris, p. s. dodds, c. m. danforth, plos one 8, e64417

(2013).

10. s. l. feld, american journal of sociology 96, 14641477 (1991).

11. n. o. hodas, f. kooti, k. lerman, proceedings of the seventh international aaai confer-

ence on weblogs and social media (aaai press, 2013).

12. f. kooti, n. o. hodas, k. lerman, proceedings of the eighth international aaai confer-

ence on weblogs and social media (aaai press, 2014).

13. h.-h. jo, y.-h. eom, phys. rev. e 90, 022809 (2014).

14. y.-h. eom, h.-h. jo, sci. rep. 4 (2014).

15. a. j. oswald1, s. wu, science 327, 576.

16. a. b. krueger, a. a. stone, science 346, 42 (2014).

17. d. r. posel, d. m. casale, social indicators research 104, 195 (2011).

18. a. de la garza, g. mastrobuoni, a. sannabe, k. yamada, the relative utility hypothesis

with and without self-reported reference wages, carlo alberto notebooks 159, collegio

carlo alberto (2010).

19. j. bollen, b. gonc  alves, g. ruan, h. mao, arti   cial life 17, 237 (2011).

20. b. stiller, et al., measuring national well-beingproposed well-being indicators, tech. rep.,

the commission on measuring well-being, japan (2010).

21. m. mcpherson, l. smith-lovin, j. m. cook, annual review of sociology 27, 415 (2001).

22. j. h. fowler, n. a. christakis, british medical journal 337 (2008).

11

23. a. d. i. kramer, j. e. guillory, j. t. hancock, proceedings of the national academy of

sciences 111 (2014).

24. e. ferrara, z. yang, plos one 10 (2015).

25. e. ferrara, z. yang, peerj computer science 1:e26 (2015).

26. r. dunbar, philos trans r soc lond b biol sci 367, 2192 (2012).

27. b. gonc  alves, n. perra, a. vespignani, plos one 6, e22656 (2011).

12

supplementary materials
the friendship network

to generate a friendship network among twitter users we started with an initial set of 104, 115

users, for which we downloaded the full list of users that they    follow    or that they are    fol-

lowed    by. reciprocal    follow    and    following    ties are taken as an indication of a friendship

relation between the two individuals (27). this resulted in a network of 104, 115 node con-

nected by 23, 640, 257 reciprocal edges. we further remove subjects with less than 15 friends

in order to improve the reliability of calculating the mean degree and mean swb values of an

individuals    friends. this reduces our    nal cohort to 39, 110 subjects connected by reciprocal

friendship relation.

friendship paradox

we then assess the magnitude of the friendship paradox in our network by calculating the frac-
tion of users ||ui     u|| whose popularity, denoted d (ui) is lower than the average popularity
of their nearest neighbors (or    friends   ) n n (ui)     u, denoted d, vs. the total number of
individuals in the network ||u||. this yields the magnitude of the friendship paradox as:

p (d) =

||{ui     u : d (ui) < d (n n (u1))}||

||u||

(1)

when the magnitude of p (d) > 0.5 we conclude that the majority of users experiences a

friendship.

happiness paradox

for each of the n = 39, 110 users that ful   ll all the requirements listed above, we further collect

their complete twitter history based on which we can assess the swb of each individual. with

this information hand, the magnitude of the happiness paradox can be obtained in a way similar

13

to the way in which we measure the friendship paradox. we simply calculate the fraction
of users ||ui     u|| whose happiness, denoted h (ui) respectively, is lower than the average
happiness of their nearest neighbours, denoted h, vs. the total number of individuals in the
network ||u||, or, mathematically:

p (h) =

||{ui     u : h (ui) < h (n n (u1))}||

||u||

(2)

id64

to determine the signi   cance of our results we employ a id64 procedure in which we

repeatedly re-sample the set of individuals in our data with replacement and re-calculate our

indicators to assess the variance of results resulting from random changes in the underlying

population. this procedure allows us to obtain con   dence intervals for all indicators by deter-

mining the 5th and 95th percentile of the results obtained for each of 5000 sub-samples with

replacement over the entire set of individuals.

null model

as mentioned in the text we verify the importance of popularity-happiness correlations by com-

paring the results we obtained in our dataset with those of a simple null-model. we keep the

structure of the network and swb distributions intact by simply resampling the complete set of

swb values with replacement and re-calculating eq. 2 and eq.1. this procedure is performed

20,000 times. we report the 95% con   dence intervals for the resulting distribution of paradox

values.

gaussian mixture components

our data contains two data points for each user:

14

    their own popularity or happiness

    the average popularity or happiness of their friends

each user can then be described as a point on a 2-dimensional euclidean plane p spanned

by their own popularity or happiness (x) and the average happiness of their group of friends (y).

in this plane, users cleanly separate in 2 clusters in p according to matching levels of popu-

larity or happiness. to determine an objective demarcation criterion we use a gaussian mixture

model (gmm) to identify membership in either of the 2 groups. the gmm is trained from

our empirical data by means of a standard expectation-maximization procedure to identify two

2d gaussian distributions that are each characterized by a center   c and co-variance   c to best

match the distribution of individuals in p . each components carries a weight w with which to

mix the 2 components to match the id203 density function of the data, but we are only

concerned with their location to demarcate the two groups of individuals. the gaussian param-

eter values obtained using the scikit-learns sklearn.mixture package without any constraints on

the covariance model are:w

component

  c

  c

1 (happy group)
2 (unhappy group)

(0.2037652, 0.21266452)
(0.00704093,0.0182976)

(0.00186789, 0.00046923)
(0.00046923, 0.0018294)

15

