8
1
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

8

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

3
v
9
7
4
7
0

.

1
0
7
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

epidemiological modeling of the 2005 french riots:

a spreading wave and the role of contagion

laurent bonnasse-gahot1, henri berestycki1 , marie-aude depuiset2,3,4, mirta b. gordon4,

sebastian roch  e2, nancy rodriguez5, jean-pierre nadal1,6,*

1   ecole des hautes   etudes en sciences sociales, psl research university, cnrs, centre d   analyse et de math  ematique

sociales, paris, france

2univ. grenoble alpes, institut d   etudes politiques de grenoble, cnrs, pacte, grenoble, france

3universit  e de lille, cnrs, umr 8019 - clers  e - centre lillois d     etudes et de recherches sociologiques et

  economiques, lille, france

4univ. grenoble alpes, cnrs, lig, grenoble france

5the university of north carolina at chapel hill, department of mathematics, chapel hill, usa

6laboratoire de physique statistique,   ecole normale sup  erieure, psl research university; universit  e paris diderot,

sorbonne paris-cit  e; sorbonne universit  es, upmc     univ. paris 06; cnrs; paris, france.

*corresponding author. email: jpnadal@ehess.fr

this is an author-produced version of an article accepted for publication in scienti   c reports

(http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-18093-4)

dated: december 15th, 2017

abstract

as a large-scale instance of dramatic collective behavior, the 2005 french riots started in a poor suburb
of paris, then spread in all of france,
lasting about three weeks. remarkably, although there were no
displacements of rioters, the riot activity did travel. access to daily national police data has allowed us to
explore the dynamics of riot propagation. here we show that an epidemic-like model, with just a few parameters
and a single sociological variable characterizing neighborhood deprivation, accounts quantitatively for the full
spatio-temporal dynamics of the riots. this is the    rst time that such data-driven modeling involving contagion
both within and between cities (through geographic proximity or media) at the scale of a country, and on a daily
basis, is performed. moreover, we give a precise mathematical characterization to the expression    wave of riots   ,
and provide a visualization of the propagation around paris, exhibiting the wave in a way not described before.
the remarkable agreement between model and data demonstrates that geographic proximity played a major role
in the propagation, even though information was readily available everywhere through media. finally, we argue
that our approach gives a general framework for the modeling of the dynamics of spontaneous collective uprisings.

introduction

attracting worldwide media attention, france experi-
enced during the autumn of 2005 the longest and most
geographically extended riot of the contemporary his-
tory of europe[1, 2]. without any political claims nor
leadership, localization was mainly limited to the    ban-
lieues    (suburbs of large metropolitan cities), where
minority groups are largely con   ned. contrary to the
london    shopping riots    of 2011, rioting in france es-
sentially consisted of car destruction and confronta-
tions with the police. the triggering event took place in
a deprived municipality at the north-east of paris: on

october 27, 2005, two youths died when intruding into
a power substation while trying to escape a police pa-
trol. inhabitants spontaneously gathered on the streets
with anger. notwithstanding the dramatic nature of
these events, the access to detailed police data[3], to-
gether with the extension in time and space     three
weeks, more than 800 municipalities hit across all of
france    , provide an exceptional opportunity for study-
ing the dynamics of a large-scale riot episode. the
present work aims at analyzing these data through a
mathematical model that sheds new light on qualita-
tive features of the riots as instances of collective hu-
man behavior[4, 5].

1

several works[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] have
developed mathematical approaches to rioting dynam-
ics, and their sociological implications have also been
discussed[16]. the 1978 article of burbeck et al. [8] pio-
neered quantitative epidemiological modeling to study
the dynamics of riots. very few works followed the
same route, but similar ideas have been applied to
other social phenomena such as the spreading of ideas
or rumors[17] and the viral propagation of memes on
the internet[18]. this original epidemiological mod-
eling was however limited to the analysis within sin-
gle cities, without spatial extension. from the analy-
sis of various sources, previous historical and sociolog-
ical studies have discussed riot contagion from place
to place [19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. however few studies aim
at quantitatively describing the spatial spread of ri-
ots, except for two notable exceptions. studies of the
2011 london riots[13, 14] describe the displacements
of rioters from neighborhoods to neighborhoods.
in
contradistinction with the london case, media reports
and case studies[3, 24] show that the 2005 french riot-
ers remained localized in a particular neighborhood of
each municipality. however, the riot itself did travel.
conceptualizing riots as interdependent events, myers
makes use of the event history approach[25] to study the
us ethnic riots on a period of several years. this anal-
ysis exhibits space-time correlations showing that riots
di   used from cities to cities[26, 10, 23]. there, each
rioting episode is considered as a single global event
(whether the city    adopts a riot    or does not), and
measures of covariances allow to relate the occurrence
of a riot in a city at a given time with the occurrence of
riots in other cities at previous times. this approach
however does not describe the internal dynamics of a
riot (its rise and fall within each city), nor the precise
timing of the spread from city to city. of course, go-
ing beyond this framework requires much more detailed
data.

our dataset, at a level of detail hitherto unavailable,
allows us to provide the    rst data-driven modeling of
riot contagion from city to city at the level of a whole
country, coupled with contagion within each city, and
with a time resolution of a day. our work, of a dif-
ferent nature than that of the econometric one, takes
its root in the epidemiological approach introduced in
the seminal work of burbeck et al [8], and is in the
spirit of recent continuous spatio-temporal data-driven
approaches in social science[27, 28, 29, 14]. here we
extend the notion of epidemiological propagation of ri-
ots by including spatial spreading, in a context where
there is no displacement of rioters. remarkably, the
high quality of our results is achieved within the sole

epidemiological framework, without any explicit mod-
eling of, e.g., the police actions (in contrast with the
2011 london riots modeling[14]). for the    rst time,
the present study provides a spatio-temporal frame-
work that shows that, following a speci   c triggering
event, propagation of rioting activity is analogous (but
for some speci   cities) to the continuous propagation of
epidemics.

more precisely, we introduce here a compartmental
epidemic model of the susceptible-infected-recovered
(sir) type[30, 31, 32].
infection takes place through
contacts within cities as well as through other short-
and long-range interactions arising from either inter-
personal networks or media coverage[6, 23]. these in-
   uence interactions are the key to riots spreading over
the discrete set of french municipalities. in particular,
di   usion based on geographic proximity played a ma-
jor role in generating a kind of riot wave around paris
which we exhibit here. this is substantiated by the
remarkable agreement between the data and the model
at various geographic scales. indeed, one of our main
   ndings is that less than ten free parameters together
with only one sociological variable (the size of the pop-
ulation of poorly educated young males) are enough to
accurately describe the complete spatio-temporal dy-
namics of the riots.

the qualitative features taken into account by our
model     the role of a single triggering e   ect, a    so-
cial tension    buildup, a somewhat slower and rather
smooth relaxation, and local as well as global spread-
ing    , are common to many riots. this suggests that
our approach gives a general framework for the mod-
eling of the spatio-temporal dynamics of spontaneous
collective uprisings.

results

the 2005 french riots dataset

we base our analysis here on the daily crime reports[3]
of all incidents recorded by the french police at the mu-
nicipalities (corresponding to the french    communes   )
under police authority, which cover municipalities with
a population of at least 20,000 inhabitants. such data,
on the detailed time course of riots at the scale of hours
or days, and/or involving a large number of cities, are
rare.
in addition, as an output of a centralized na-
tional recording procedure applied in all national police
units operating at the local level, the data are homo-
geneous in nature     and not subject to the selection
or description biases which are frequent with media
sources[33]. these qualities endow these data with a

2

unique scienti   c value. we adopt a simple methodol-
ogy for quantifying the rioting activity: we de   ne as a
single event any rioting-like act, as listed in the daily
police reports, leaving aside its nature and its apparent
intensity. thus, each one of    5 burnt cars    ,    police of-
   cers attacked with stones    or    stoning of    remen   , is
labeled as a single event. we thus get a dataset com-
posed of the number of riot-like events for each mu-
nicipality, every day from october 26 to december 8,
2005, a period of 44 days which covers the three weeks
of riots and extends over two weeks after.

figure 1a (left panel) shows at its top two typical ex-
amples of the time course of the number of events for
municipalities (see also the plots for the 12 most ac-
tive   ile-de-france municipalities, supplementary fig.
s1). a striking observation is that there is a similar
up-and-down dynamics at every location, showing no
rebound, or, if any, hardly distinguishable from the ob-
vious stochasticity in the data. this pattern is similar
to the one observed for the us ethnic riots[8]. in ad-
dition, as illustrated on fig. 1 and supplementary fig.
s3, we observe the same pattern across di   erent spatial
scales (municipalities, d  epartements, r  egions, all coun-
try     see materials and methods for a description of
these administrative divisions). moreover, this pattern
shows up clearly despite the di   erence in amplitudes
(see also section fitting the data: the wave across the
whole country). this multi-scale property suggests an
underlying mechanism for which geographical proxim-
ity matters. finally, the rioting activity appears to
be on top of a background level: as can be seen on
fig. 1, the number of events relaxes towards the very
same level that it had at the outset of the period. ac-
tually, in the police data, one cannot always discrim-
inate rioting facts from ordinary criminal ones, such
as the burning of cars unrelated to collective uprising.
for each location, we assume that the stationary back-
ground activity corresponds to this    normal    criminal
activity.

modeling framework

we now introduce our modeling approach. section ma-
terials and methods provides the full model and numer-
ical details, as well as various quantitative statistical
analyses for the    ts that follow. the model features
presented below are based on the analysis at the scale
of municipalities. however, since aggregated data at
the scale of d  epartements present a pattern similar to
the data of municipalities, we also    t the model at the
d  epartement scale, as if the model assumptions were
correct at the scale of each d  epartement. a    site   , be-

low, is either a municipality or a d  epartement depend-
ing on the scale considered.
as the rioting activities are described by a discrete set
of events, we assume an underlying point process[34]
characterized by its mean value. assuming no coupling
between the dynamics of the rioting and criminal activ-
ities (see materials and methods for a discussion), the
expected number of events at each site k (k = 1, ..., k,
k being the number of sites), is the sum of the mean
(time independent) background activity   bk, and of the
(time dependent) rioting activity,   k(t). in    tting the
model to the data, we take the background activity   bk
as the average number of events at the considered site
over the last two weeks of our dataset. assuming pois-
son statistics (which appears to be in good agreement
with the data, see materials and methods), the means
  k(t) fully characterize the rioting activities. we make
the assumption that this number of events   k(t) is pro-
portional to the local number of rioters, ik(t):

  k(t) =   ik(t).

(1)
we model the coupled dynamics of the set of 2  k vari-
ables, the numbers ik(t) of rioters (infected individuals
in the terminology of the sir model) and the numbers
sk(t) of individuals susceptible to join the riot, by writ-
ing an epidemic sir model[30, 32] in a form suited for
the present study, as explained below. this gives the
coupled dynamics of the   k(t) and of the associated
variables,

  k(t)       sk(t).

(2)

these dummy variables can be seen as the reservoirs of
events (the maximum expected numbers of events that
may occur from time t onwards). we    t the model to
the data by considering a discrete time version of the
equations (events are reported on a daily basis), and by
optimizing the choice of the model free parameters with
a maximum likelihood method. the result of the    t is
a set of k smooth curves (in time),   k(t), k = 1, .., k.
for each location k, and each time t, the corresponding
empirical data point has to be seen as a probabilistic
realization of the poisson process whose mean is   k(t).
before going into the modeling details and the    ts,
we now give the main characteristics of the proposed
sir model. we assume homogeneous interactions
within each municipality (a hypothesis justi   ed by the
coarse-grained nature of the data, and by the absence of
displacements of rioters), and in   uences between sites.
the model thus belongs to the category of metapopu-
lation epidemic models [35]. motivated by the relative
smoothness of the time course of events, we make the
strong assumption that, at each site, there is a constant

3

rate at which rioters leave the riot. this parameter ag-
gregates the e   ects of di   erent factors     arrests, strin-
gent policing, other sources of deterrence, fear, fatigue,
etc.    , none of them being here modeled explicitly. in
addition, since there are almost no rebounds of rioting
activity, we assume that there is no    ux from recovered
(those who left the riot) to susceptible (and thus we
do not have to keep track of the number of recovered
individuals).

in the epidemic of an infectious disease, contagion
typically occurs by dyadic interactions, so that the
id203 for a susceptible individual to be infected
is proportional to the fraction of infected individuals
    leading to equations written in terms of the frac-
tions of infected and susceptible individuals.
in the
present context, contagion results from a bandwagon
e   ect[36, 7, 4]. the id203 of becoming a rioter
is thus a function of the number of rioters, hence of
the number of events given the above hypothesis. this
function is non-linear since, being a id203, it must
saturate at some value (at most 1) for large rioting ac-
tivities.

single site epidemic modeling

as a    rst step, following burbeck et al., we ignore inter-
actions between sites, and thus specify the sir model
for each site separately. we consider here one single
site (and omit the site index k in the equations). be-
fore a triggering event occurs at some time t0, there is
a certain number s0 > 0 of susceptible individuals but
no rioters. at t0 there is an exogenous shock leading
to a sudden increase in the i population, hence in   ,
yielding an initial condition   (t0) = a > 0. from then
on, the rioting activity at a single (isolated) site evolves

according to:                     

d  (t)

dt

d  (t)

dt

=         (t) +      (t)   (t),
=         (t)   (t),

where    is a susceptibility parameter. here we work
within a linear approximation of the id203 to
become infected, which appears to provide good re-
sults for the single site modeling the condition for the
riot to start after the shock is that the reproduction
number[31] r0 =     (t0)/   is greater than 1. in such
a case, from t = t0 onward, the number of infected
individuals increases, passes through a maximum and
relaxes back towards zero.

we obtain the initial condition   0 =   (t0) =   s0
from the    tting procedure. thus for each site, we are

4

figure 1: data and single site    ts at di   erent scales.
(a) raw data (gray dots), provided alone for a clearer
and unbiased view. (b) same data along with the cali-
brated model (red curve). top: municipalities; middle:
d  epartements; bottom: all of france (see materials and
methods for a description of these administrative divi-
sions). here and in all the other    gures involving time,
the thin dotted lines divide the time axis into one week
periods, starting from the date of the shock, october
27, 2005.

(3a)

(3b)

left with    ve free parameters to    t in order to best
approximate the time course of the rioting events:   ,
  , t0, a and   0.

by showing examples at di   erent scales, fig. 1 (b,
red curves) illustrate the remarkable quality of the re-
sulting    ts (see also supplementary fig. s1). the
obvious limitation is that    tting all the 853 munici-
palities present in the dataset amounts to determin-
ing 853    5 = 4265 free parameters. the    t is very
good but meaningless (over   tting) for sites with only
one or two events.
in addition, these single site    ts
cannot explain why the riot started on some particu-
lar date at each location. fitting the single site model
requires one to assume that there is one exogenous spe-
ci   c shock at a speci   c time at each location, whereas

a10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/08024681012riot eventsclichy sous bois10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/0801234riot eventsdrancy10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/080102030riot events9510/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/080204060riot events5910/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/08date0100200300400500riot eventsfranceb10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/08024681012riot eventsclichy sous bois10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/0801234riot eventsdrancy10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/080102030riot events9510/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/080204060riot events5910/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/08date0100200300400500riot eventsfrancethe triggering of the local riot actually results from the
riot events that occurred before elsewhere. neverthe-
less, we see that everywhere the patterns are compat-
ible with an epidemic dynamics and that through the
use of the model it is possible to    ll in missing data and
to smooth the data (   ltering out the noise). as a re-
sult of this    ltering, the global pattern of propagation
becomes more apparent. indeed, looking at the paris
area, one observes a kind of wave starting at clichy-
sous-bois municipality, di   using to nearby locations,
spreading around paris, and eventually dying out in
the more wealthy south-west areas (see supplementary
video 1).

modeling the riot wave

we now take into account the interactions between
sites, specifying the global metapopulation sir model.
among the k sites under consideration, only one site
k0, the municipality of clichy-sous-bois (d  epartement
93 when working at d  epartement scale), undergoes a
shock at a time t0, october 27, 2005. to avoid a num-
ber of parameters which would scale with the number
of sites, we choose here all free parameters to be site-
independent (in materials and methods we give a more
general presentation of the model). the resulting sys-
tem of 2    k coupled equations writes as follows: for
t > t0, for k = 1, ..., k,

d  k(t)

dt

d  k(t)

dt

=         k(t) +   k(t)   (  k(t)),
=      k(t)   (  k(t)).

(4a)

(4b)

                     

here    is the site-independent value for the recovering
rate. for the interaction term we consider that at any
site k the id203 to join the riot is a function    of a
quantity   k(t), the global activity as    seen    from site k.
this represents how, on average, susceptible individu-
als feel concerned by rioting events occurring either lo-
cally, in neighboring cities, or anywhere else in france.
whatever the means by which the information on the
events is received (face-to-face interaction, phone, local
or national media     tv or radio broadcasts, newspa-
pers    , digital media, ...), we make the hypothesis that
the closer the events (in geographic terms), the stronger
their in   uence. we thus write that   k(t) is a weighted
sum of the rioting activities occurring in all sites,

(cid:88)

  k(t) =

wkj   j(t),

(5)

j

where the weights wkj depend on the distance between
sites k and j. a simple hypothesis would have been to

5

(cid:88)

assume nearest-neighbor contagion. we have checked
that such scenario fails to reproduce the riots dynam-
ics, which can be easily understood: the riot would not
propagate from areas with deprived neighborhoods to
other similar urban areas whenever separated by cities
without poor neighborhoods. we rather consider the
weights as given by a decreasing function of the dis-
tance. we tested several ways of choosing this function
and obtained the best results for two types of parame-
terization. one is a power law decay with the distance,
motivated by several empirical studies of interactions
relying on modern technologies[37, 38, 39]. the sec-
ond option is the sum of an exponential decay and of
a constant term. both involve two parameters, a prox-
imity scale d0 and, respectively, the exponent    and the
strength    of the constant term.
for the (site independent) function   (.), we consider
either its linear approximation, writing

  (  k(t)) =      k(t) =   

wkj   j(t),

(6)

j

with the susceptibility    as a site-independent free pa-
rameter, or various non-linear cases, involving up to
four parameters.

lastly, we have to make the crucial choice of the
initial values   k,0 =   k(t0), speci   c to each site. by
de   nition, they must be proportional to the size of the
initial susceptible population. we make the hypothe-
sis that the latter scales with the size of a population
de   ned by a sociological speci   cation. thus we assume

  k,0 =   0 nk,

(7)

where   0 is a site-independent free parameter, and nk
is the size of a reference population provided for each
municipality by insee, the french national statistics
and economic studies institute. the results we present
below take as reference the population of males aged
between 16 and 24 out-of-school with no diploma. we
   nd this population, whose size can be viewed as an
index of deprivation, to provide the best results when
comparing the model    ts done with di   erent refer-
ence populations (see materials and methods). this
is in line, not only with the fact that riots started
and propagated in poor neighborhoods, but also with
the fact that most rioters where males, young, and
poorly educated[3, 1, 2]     features common to many
urban riots[5]. one should note that, once we have
chosen this speci   c reference population     hence set-
ting the susceptible population in deprived neighbor-
hoods    , the hypotheses on the structure of the inter-
actions implicitly assume interactions between popu-
lations with similar socio-economic characteristics. in

particular, a distance-independent term in the inter-
action weights may correspond to proximity primarily
perceived in terms of cultural, socio-economic charac-
teristics. our model thus allows to combine spatial and
socio-economic characteristics, which are both known
to potentially a   ect riot contagion[10, 40].

finally, for the whole dynamics (with a number of
coupled equations ranging from 186 up to 2560, de-
pending on the case, see below), in the simplest linear
case we are left with only six free parameters:   , a,
  0, d0,    or   , and   . in the non-linear case, we have
   ve parameters as for the linear case,   , a,   0, d0,    or
  , and, in place of   , up to four parameters depending
on the choice of the function   . in the following, we
will also allow for speci   c    values at a small number
of sites, adding as many parameters.

the above model, in the case of the linear approx-
imation, makes links to the classical spatially contin-
uous, non-local, sir model[41] (see section links to
the original spatially continuous sir model in mate-
rials and methods, and supplementary videos 3 and
4). in dimension one, when the space is homogeneous,
we know[42] that traveling waves can propagate, quite
similar to the way the riot spread around paris as ex-
hibited in the previous section. the new class of mod-
els we have introduced is however somewhat di   erent
and more general, and raises several open mathematical
questions. the next section shows the wave generated
by our global model and the    t to the data.

fitting the data: the wave around paris

we    rst focus on the contagion around paris, charac-
terized by a continuous dense urban fabric with de-
prived neighborhoods. there are 1280 municipalities
in   ile-de-france. among the ones under police author-
ity (a total of 462 municipalities, for all of which we
have data), 287 are mentioned for at least one riot-like
event. for all the other municipalities, which are under
   gendarmerie    authority (a military status force with
policing duties), we have no data. since their popu-
lation size is small, we expect the associated numbers
of riot events to be very small if not absent, so that
these sites have little in   uence on the whole dynam-
ics. we choose the free parameters with the maximum
likelihood method, making use of the available data,
i.e. the 462 municipalities. however, the model sim-
ulations take into account all the 1280 municipalities.
results are presented for a power law decrease of the
weights and a non-linear function    characterized by 3
parameters (see materials and methods for a quantita-
tive comparison of di   erent model variants). thus, we

have here a total of 8 free parameters:   , a,   0, d0,   , in
addition to three for the non-linear function.

figures 2, 3 and the supplementary video 2 illus-
trate the main results. figure 2 compares the model
and the data on four aspects:
time course in each
d  epartement (a), amplitude of the events (b), date at
which the number of events is maximum (c), and spa-
tial distribution of the riots (d). the global model
with a single shock correctly reproduces the up-and-
down pattern at each location, as illustrated on fig. 2
at d  epartement scale. one can note the preservation
of the smooth relaxation at each site, despite the in-
   uence of other (still active) sites. this can be un-
derstood from the sir dynamics: at a given location,
the relaxation term (       k) dominates when there is
no more enough susceptible individuals, so that the lo-
cal dynamics becomes essentially independent of what
is occurring elsewhere. quite importantly, these local
patterns occur at the correct times. one sees that the
date of maximum activity spreads over several days and
varies across locations, which re   ects the propagation
of the riot.

on the supplementary video 2 one can see the wave
generated by the model. figure 3b shows a sketch of
this wave as a timeline with one image every 4 days    
which corresponds to the timescale found by the pa-
rameter optimization, 1/       4 days. for comparison,
we show side by side, fig. 3a, the timeline built from
the data which have been smoothed making use of the
single site    ts. one can see the good agreement, except
for few locations where the actual rioting activity oc-
curs earlier than predicted by the global model. a most
visible exception is argenteuil municipality (north-west
of paris on the map, see fig. 3, second images from
the top), where the minister of interior made a speech
(october 25) perceived as provocative by the banlieues
residents. this could potentially explain the faster re-
sponse to the triggering event.

the calibrated model gives the time course of the ex-
pected number of events in all municipalities, including
those under    gendarmerie    authority for which we do
not have any data. for all of the later, the model pre-
dicts a value remaining very small during all the stud-
ied period, except for one, the municipality of fleury-
m  erogis (see fig. 2d, south of the map). remark-
ably, searching in the media coverage, we found that
a kindergarten has been burnt in that municipality at
that period of time (nov. 6).

6

figure 2: results:   ile-de-france r  egion, model calibra-
tion at the scale of municipalities. (a) time course of
the riots: data (dots) and model (continuous curves)    
results presented here are aggregated by d  epartement.
(b) total number of events, model vs. data. each dot
represents one municipality. in order to compute the
total sum of events in the data, missing values were
   lled using linear interpolation. (c) temporal unfold-
ing, model vs. data. date (unit=day) of the maximum
rioting activity, shown for the 12 most active munici-
palities (those with more than 30 events). each circle
has a diameter proportional to the size of the reference
population of the corresponding municipality. the red
lines depict the identity diagonal line. (d) geographic
map of the total rioting activity. data (left) vs model
(right), shown for the inner suburb of paris (the    pe-
tite couronne   , d  epartements 92, 93 and 94). for each
municipality, the color codes the total number of events
(the warmer the larger, same scale for both panels; gray
areas: data not available).

figure 3: timeline of the riots in paris area (  ile-de-
france). the rioting activity is shown every 4 days,
starting on the day following the triggering event (top).
(a) data smoothed by making use of the    tted val-
ues given by the single site models (see supplementary
video 1 for the full dynamics). (b) dynamics generated
by the global model (see supplementary video 2). the
map shows the municipality boundaries, with paris at
the center for each municipality under police authority,
a circle is drawn with an area proportional to the size of
the corresponding reference population. the color rep-
resents the intensity of the rioting activity: the warmer
the color, the higher the activity. figure best viewed
magni   ed in the electronic version.

7

a0204060807702040608078020406080910204060809210/2711/170204060809310/2711/170204060809410/2711/1702040608095riot eventsdateb0204060data0204060modelc10/2711/03data10/2711/03modeldabfitting the data:
whole country

the wave across the

we now show that the same model reproduces the
full dynamics across the whole country. we apply our
global model considering each one of the d  epartements
of metropolitan france (except corsica and paris,
hence 93 d  epartements) as one homogeneous site    
computing at municipality scale would be too demand-
ing (more than 36, 000 municipalities). the materials
and methods section details the comparison between
various model options. we present here the results for
the model version making use of the linear approxima-
tion, with 9 free parameters:   , a,   0, d0,   , the same
susceptibility    everywhere except for three di   erent
values, for the d  epartements 13, 62 and 93. as for the
wave around paris, the resulting    t is very good, as
illustrated on fig. 4 (see also supplementary fig. s3).
figures 4a and 4b show the results for the 12 most ac-
tive d  epartements. figure 4c compares model and data
on the total number of events, and fig. 4d on the date
of the maximum activity. for the latter, the data for
the   ile-de-france municipalities (fig. 2c) are reported.
one sees that the wave indeed spread over all france,
with the dynamics in paris area essentially preceding
the one elsewhere.
remarkably, one can see the e   ect of the riot wave even
where few rioting events have been recorded. the data
exhibit a concentration of (weak) activities (fig. 5a),
a pattern which would not be expected in case of in-
dependent random events. the epidemiological model
predicts these minor sites to be hit by the wave, with
a small amplitude and at the correct period of time.
this is apparent on fig. 5b and can be shown to be
statistically signi   cant (see materials and methods and
supplementary fig. s4 for more details).
finally, we validate here the hypothesis that it is
the number, and not the proportion, of individuals
(susceptible individuals, rioters) that matters. the
very same model, but with densities and not numbers,
yields a much less good    t (see materials and meth-
ods). this comes as a quantitative con   rmation of the
hypothesized bandwagon e   ect, in line with previous
literature[7, 4].

discussion

figure 4: results: all of france, model calibration
at the scale of the d  epartements. (a) time course of
the riots in france: data (dots) and model (continu-
ous curves). only the 12 most active d  epartements are
shown. the plots share a common scale for the num-
ber of events. (b) same as (a), but with relative scales.
(c) total number of events.
(d) temporal unfolding
(date when the number of riot events reaches its maxi-
mum value), shown for the d  epartements having more
than 60 events. each blue circle has a diameter propor-
tional to the reference population of the corresponding
d  epartements. the gray crosses remind the plot loca-
tions of the major municipalities of   ile-de-france shown
in fig. 2c. the red lines depict the identity diagonal
line.

studying the dynamics of riot propagation, a dramatic
instance of large-scale social contagion, is di   cult due
to the scarcity of data. the present work takes advan-
tage of the access to detailed national police data on
the 2005 french riots that o   er both the timescale of

the day over a period of 3 weeks, and the geographic
extension over the country. these data exhibit remark-
able features that warrant a modeling approach. we
have shown that a simple parsimonious epidemic-like
model combining contagion both within and between

8

a050130505905062050690507605077050780509110/2711/170509210/2711/170509310/2711/170509410/2711/1705095riot eventsdateb0101305059051062010206901020760207702078010209110/2711/170209210/2711/170509310/2711/17020409410/2711/1702095riot eventsdatec0200400600800data0200400600800modeld10/2711/0311/10data10/2711/0311/10modelond, strong interpersonal ties are at stake for dragging
people into actions that confront social order. the un-
derlying interpretation is that interpersonal networks
are relevant for understanding riot participation. hu-
man behavior is a consequence not only of individu-
als    attributes but also of the strength of the relation
they hold with other individuals[43]. strong interper-
sonal connections to others who are already mobilized
draw new participants into particular forms of collec-
tive action such as protest, and identity (ethnic or reli-
gious based) movements[44, 45]. third, concentration
of socio-economic disadvantage facilitates formation of
a sizeable group and therefore involvement in destruc-
tion: the numbers of rioters in the model (rather than
proportions) can be interpreted as an indirect indica-
tion of risk assessment before participating in a con-
frontation with the police[46, 5]. from this viewpoint,
rioters seem to adopt a rational behavior and only en-
gage in such event when their number is su   cient.

the question of parsimony is of the essence in our
modeling approach: an outstanding question was to
understand whether a limited number of parameters
might account for the observed phenomena at various
scales and in various locations. we answer this question
positively here, thus revealing the existence of a general
mechanism at work: general, since (i) the model is con-
sistent with what has occurred at each location hit by
the riot, and (ii) a similar up-and-down pattern is ob-
served for the us ethnic riots in di   erent cities[8], sug-
gesting that this process is indeed common to a large
class of spontaneous riots. the wave we have exhibited
has a precise meaning supported by the mathematical
analysis.
indeed, it is generated by a single trigger-
ing event, with a mechanistic-like dynamics giving to
the ensemble of local riots a status of a single global
episode occurring at the scale of the country, with a
well-de   ned timescale for the propagation.

whether an initially local riot initiates a wave, and,
if so, what is its geographic extension, depend on con-
ditions similar to those at work for disease propaga-
tion: a high enough density of susceptible individuals,
a suitable contact network and large enough suscepti-
bilities. the 2005 riot propagation from place to place
after a single shock is reminiscent of the spreading of
other riots, such as the one of food riots in the late
eighteen century in the uk[21], or of local propaga-
tions during the week of riots in the us in reaction to
martin luther king assassination. the latter series of
riots has been coined as a    wave within a wave   , the
larger wave corresponding to the series of us ethnic ri-
ots from 1964 to 1971[23]. however, this larger    wave   
does not appear to be of the same nature as the travel-

figure 5: minor sites: even where the number of events
was very small, one can detect the riot wave. (a) raster
plot of the activities of the 32 d  epartements having
at most 2 events each day (black: no event, red: 1
event, yellow: 2 events; the d  epartements are ordered
by their id number, as on supplementary fig. s4). (b)
data together with the predictions of the epidemiolog-
ical model     the one of fig. 4. for ease of presentation,
plots only shown for a subset, the 16 with the smallest
total number of events on the period (see supplemen-
tary fig. s4 for the full set of 32 d  epartements).

cities, allows one to reproduce the daily time course of
events, revealing the wave of contagion. the simplest
model version with only 6 parameters already accounts
for the wave very well, and more elaborated versions
with about 10 parameters account for even    ner de-
tails of the dynamics. a crucial model ingredient is
the choice of a single sociological variable, taken from
the census statistics as a proxy for calibrating the size
of the susceptible population. it shows that the wave
propagates in an excitable medium of deprived neigh-
borhoods.

it is interesting to put in contrast the results ob-
tained here with a model where homogeneous weights
are independent of the geographic distance, which we
can consider as a null hypothesis model with regards
to the geographic dependency. as discussed in mate-
rials and methods and illustrated on supplementary
fig. s5, such a hypothesis fails to produce a wave,
and, more unexpectedly, cannot account for the am-
plitudes of the riot. this con   rms that di   usion by
geographic proximity is a key underlying mechanism,
and points towards the in   uence on the riots breadth
of the concentration of urban areas with a high den-
sity of deprived neighborhoods (as it is the case for the
d  epartements of   ile-de-france, 77, 78, 91, 92, 94 and
95). thus, one can conclude that, having the outbreak
location surrounded by a dense continuum of deprived
neighborhoods made the large-scale contagion possible.
what lesson on human behavior can we draw from
our analysis? first, as we just indicated,    geography
matters   [39]: despite the modern communication me-
dia, physical proximity is still a major feature in the
circulation of ideas or behaviors, here of rioting. sec-

9

a10/2711/1712/08dated  partementsb00.51400.51500.51900.511200.5115011700.5119022200.512300.513200.514300.514610/2711/1700.514810/2711/170125310/2711/170127310/2711/1700.5179riot eventsdateing wave discussed here. indeed,    rst, most of the riots
in this long time period in the us have each their own
triggering event. second, these events are separated
one from another by large times gaps and are there-
fore discontinuous whereas we describe the continuous
epidemiological spreading by a wave. to discuss such
series of riots as these over long period of times, we
note that there is no conceptual di   culty in extending
our model to larger timescales     by adding a weak    ux
from recovered to susceptible individuals, and by deal-
ing with several shocks    , although one would also have
to take into account group identity changes and the ef-
fect of policies on structural characteristics of cities.
however, the main issue here is rather the access to a
detailed set of data.

in any case, the modeling approach introduced here
provides a generative framework, di   erent from the sta-
tistical/econometric approach, that may be adapted to
the detailed description of the propagation of sponta-
neous collective uprisings from a main triggering event
    notably, the interaction term in our sir model can
be modi   ed to include time delays (time for the infor-
mation to travel), to take into account time integration
of past events, or to be also based on non-geographic
criteria (e.g. cultural, ethnic, socio-economic similarity
features). we believe that such extensions will lead to
interesting developments in the study of spreading of
social behaviors.

materials and methods

french administrative divisions

the three main french administrative divisions are:
the    commune   , which we refer to as municipality in
the paper (more than 36, 000 communes in france);
at a mid-level scale the    d  epartement   , somewhat
analogous to the english district (96 d  epartements
in metropolitan france,
labeled from 1 to 95, with
2a and 2b for corsica); the    r  egion    aggregating
several neighboring d  epartements (12 in metropolitan
france, as of 2016, excluding corsica). at a given
level, geographic and demographic characteristics are
heterogeneous. the typical diameter of a d  epartement
is     100 km, and the one of a r  egion,     250 km.
there are two national police forces, the    police   
and the    gendarmerie    (a civilian like police force
reporting to the ministry of interior whose agents have
a military status in charge of policing the rural parts
of the country). most urbanized areas (covering all
municipalities with a population superior to 20000)
are under police authority. the more rural ones are

under gendarmerie authority. the available data for
the present study only concern the municipalities
under police authority, except paris, for which we lack
data (but was not much a   ected by the riots).
the full
list of the municipalities is available on
the french government website, https://www.data.
gouv.fr/fr/datasets/competence-territoriale-
gendarmerie-et-police-nationales/.

dataset

from the source to the dataset. the present anal-
ysis is based on the daily crime reports of all incidents
of civil unrest reported by the french police at the mu-
nicipalities under police authority[3] (see above). we
have been working with this raw source, that is the
set of reports as transmitted by the local police de-
partments, before any formatting or recoding by the
national police statistical unit. the daily reports are
written in natural language, and have been encoded to
allow for statistical treatment. from the reports we se-
lected only facts related to urban violence. some facts
are reported more than once (a    rst time when the fact
was discovered, and then one or two days later e.g. if
the perpetrators have been identi   ed). we carefully
tried to detect and suppress double counting, but some
cases may have been missed.

in the police data, incidents in relation with the ri-
ots are mostly cases of vehicles set on    re (about 70%),
but also burning of public transportation vehicles, pub-
lic buildings, of waste bins, damages to buses and bus
shelters, confrontations between rioters and police, etc.
facts have been encoded with the maximum precision:
day and time of the fact, who or what was the target,
the type of damage, the number and kind of damaged
objects and the number and quality of persons involved,
whenever these details are mentioned in the report. in
the present work, as explained in the main text, from
these details, we compute a daily number of events per
municipality. we generated a dataset for these events
(with a total of 6877 entries concerning 853 municipal-
ities).

there are a few missing or incomplete data     no-
tably in the nights when rioting was at its maximum,
as the police was overwhelmed and reported only ag-
gregated facts, instead of details city per city. note
that if one has, e.g., a number of burnt cars only at the
d  epartement scale, one cannot know what is the cor-
responding number of events, since each one of these
events at municipality scale corresponds to an unknown
number of burnt cars. hence if for a particular day,
the police report gives the information only aggregated

10

at d  epartement scale, one cannot even make use of it
when modeling at this scale. quantitatively, for the
analysis of the events in   ile-de-france, working with
the 462 municipalities under police authority, there is
1.6% of missing data (334 out of 462  44days = 20, 328
data values). for the analysis at the scale of the 93
d  epartements, there is 0.2% of missing values (10 out
93    44 = 4092).
datasets for future works.
in addition, we have
also built two other datasets. from the same police
source, we built a dataset for the arrests (2563 entries),
that in forthcoming work will serve to characterize the
rioters as well as to investigate the deterrent e   ect of ar-
rests on the riot dynamics. in future work we also plan
to explore the rioting events beyond the sole number
of events as studied here. one expects to see what has
been for instance the role, if any, of curfews and other
deterrent e   ects (in space and time). we also plan to
study whether or not the intensity per event smoothly
relaxes like the number of events itself. from both local
newspapers and national tv and radio broadcasts, we
built a speci   c dataset of media coverage. in ongoing
work we extend our modeling framework by consider-
ing the coupling between the dynamics of riot events
and the media coverage.

background activity

the rioting activity appears to be above a constant
level which most likely corresponds to criminal activ-
ities (an average of an order of 100 vehicles are burnt
every day in france, essentially due to criminal acts not
related to collective uprising). since this background
activity has the same level before and after the riot, we
assumed that the dynamics of the riot and of the crim-
inal activities are independent.
in addition, we also
considered alternative models where the background
activity and the rioting activity would be coupled, the
background activity being considered as an equilibrium
state, and the riot as a transient excited state. such
models would predict an undershooting of the activity
just after the end of the riot     more exactly a relax-
ation with damped oscillations    , but the data do not
exhibit such behavior

for the    ts, the background activity   b is taken as
the mean activity over the last two weeks in our dataset
(november 25 to december 8), period that we can con-
sider as the tail of the data, for which there is no longer
any riot activity (see fig. 1). for the sites with a non
zero number of events in the tail, we observe that this
baseline rate is proportional to the size of the reference
population chosen for calibrating the size of the sus-

ceptible population. for the sites where the number of
events in the tail is either zero or unknown (which is
the case for a large number of small municipalities, in
particular the ones under gendarmerie authority), one
needs to give a non zero value to the corresponding
baseline rate in order to apply the maximum likelihood
method (see below). we estimated it from the size of
the reference population (set as 1 when it is 0), using
the latter proportionality coe   cient (with a maximum
value of   b set to one over the length of the tail, ie
1/14).
statistical tests of the poisson hypothesis are provided
below, paragraph poisson noise assumption, station-
ary tails statistics.

epidemiological modeling: single site
model

we detail here the compartmental sir model when ap-
plied to each site separately (each municipality, or, af-
ter aggregating the data, for each d  epartement). let us
consider a particular site (we omit here the site index
k in the equations). at each time t there is a number
s(t) of individual susceptible to join the riot, and i(t)
of infected individuals (rioters). those who leave the
riots become recovered individuals. since we assume
that there is no    ux from recovered to susceptible, we
do not have to keep track of the number of recovered
individuals. initially, before a triggering event at some
time t0 occurs, there is a certain number s0 > 0 of
susceptible individuals but no rioters, that is, i(t) = 0
for all t     t0. at t0 there is an exogenous shock and
the number of rioters becomes positive i(t0) = i0 > 0.
from there on, neglecting    uctuations, the numbers of
rioters and of susceptible individuals evolve according
to the following set of equations:

di(t)

dt

ds(t)

dt

=        i(t) + s(t) p (s     i, t)
=     s(t) p (s     i, t)

(8a)

(8b)

                     

in eq.
let us now explain this system of equations.
(8a),    is the constant rate at which rioters leave the
riot. the second term in the right hand side of eq. (8a)
gives the    ux from susceptible to infected as the prod-
uct of the number of susceptible individuals, times the
id203 p (s     i, t) for a susceptible individual to
become infected. the second equation, eq. (8b), sim-
ply states that those who join the riot leave the sub-
population of susceptible individuals.
we now specify the id203 to join the riot,
p (s     i, t) (to become infected when in the suscep-

11

tible state).
in line with accounts of other collective
uprising phenomena[5], testimonies from participants
in the 2005 riots suggest a bandwagon e   ect: individu-
als join the riot when seeing a group of rioters in action.
threshold decision models[36, 7] describe this herding
behavior assuming that each individual has a threshold.
when the herd size is larger than this threshold the in-
dividual joins the herd. granovetter[7] has speci   cally
applied such a model to riot formation, the threshold
being then the number of rioters beyond which the in-
dividual decides to join the riot. here we make the
simpler hypothesis that the id203 to join the riot
does not depend on idiosyncratic factors, and is only an
increasing function of the total number of rioters at the
location (site) under consideration. it is worth empha-
sizing that this herding behavior is in contrast with the
epidemic of an infectious disease, where contagion typi-
cally occurs from dyadic interactions, in which case the
id203 is proportional to the fraction of infected
individuals, i(t)/s0. being a id203, p (s     i, t)
must saturate at some value (at most 1) for large i,
and is thus a non-linear function of i. nevertheless,
we will    rst assume that conditions are such that we
can approximate p (s     i, t) by its linear behavior:
p (s     i, t)       i(t) (but note that    does not scale
with 1/s0) and discuss later a di   erent speci   cation
for this term.

given the assumption   (t) =   i(t), it is convenient

epidemiological modeling: non local
contagion

we give here the details on the global sir model, with
interactions between sites. we have a discrete num-
ber k of sites, with homogeneous mixing within each
site, and interactions between sites. at each site k,
there is a number sk of    susceptible    individuals, ik of
   infected    (rioters), and rk of    recovered    individuals.
as above, there is no    ux from recovered to susceptible
(hence we can ignore the variables rk), and individuals
at site k leave the riot at a constant rate   k. assuming
homogeneous mixing in each site, the dynamics is given
by the following set of equations:

dik(t)

dt

dsk(t)

dt

=       k ik(t) + sk(t) pk(s     i, t)
=     sk(t) pk(s     i, t)

(11a)

(11b)

with the initial conditions t < t0 ik(t) = 0, sk(t) =
sk0 > 0, and at t = t0, a shock occurs at a single
location k0, ik(t0) = i0 > 0. in the above equations,
  k is the local recovering rate, and pk(s     i, t) is the
id203 for a s-individual at location k to become
a rioter at time t.

we now write the resulting equations for the   k. we
assume the rioting activity to be proportional to the
number of rioters:

to de   ne

  (t) =   s(t)

(9)

  k(t) =   ik(t)

(12)

so that the riot dynamics at a single (isolated) site is

described by:                     

d  (t)

dt

d  (t)

dt

=         (t) +      (t)   (t)
=         (t)   (t)

(10a)

(10b)

where          
   . initially    = 0, which is a    xed point of
this system of equations. with   (t0) =   0 > 0, the riot
starts after the shock if the reproduction number[31]
r0         0/   =   s0/   is greater than 1.
in such a
case, from t = t0 onward, the number of infected indi-
viduals    rst increases, then goes through a maximum
and eventually relaxes back towards zero. because   
is not of order 1/s0, this condition seems too easy to
satisfy: at any time, any perturbation would initiate a
riot. one may assume that the particular parameter
values allowing one to    t the data describe the state of
the system at that particular period. previous months
and days of escalation of tension may have led to an
increase in the susceptibility   , or in the number of
susceptible individuals s0.

note that di   erent hypothesis on the dependency of   k
on ik could be considered. for instance we tested   k    
(ik)q with some exponent q coming as an additional
free parameter. in that case, the optimization actually
gives that q is close to 1.

multiplying each side of (11) by   , one gets

d  k(t)

dt

d  k(t)

dt

=       k   k(t) +   k(t) pk(s     i, t)
=       k(t) pk(s     i, t)

(13a)

(13b)

where as before we introduce   k(t) =   sk(t). taking
into account the hypothesis on the linear dependency
of the number of event in the number of rioters, (12),
we write p (s     i, t) directly in term of the   s:

pk(s     i, t) =   k(  k(t))

(14)

where   k(t) is the activity    seen    from site k (see main
text):

  k(t)    (cid:88)

wkj  j(t)

(15)

j

12

                     

                     

where the weights wkj are given by a decreasing func-
tion of the distance dist(k, j) between sites k and j:
wkj = w (dist(k, j)) (see below). the single site case
is recovered for wkj =   k,j.

in the linear approximation,

is the sum of an exponential decay and of a constant
term

wkj =    + (1       ) exp (   dist(k, j)/d0)

(20)

in both cases we normalize the weights so that for every
site k, wkk = 1. taking site-independent free parame-
ters, both cases give two free parameters, d0 and    for
the choice (19), d0 and    for the choice (20).

=       k   k(t)

j

wkj  j(t).

(17b)

distance-independent null hypothesis
model

  k(  ) =   k   ,

(16)

in which case one gets the set of equations

=       k   k(t) +   k   k(t)

wkj  j(t)

(17a)

(cid:88)

                                 

d  k(t)

dt

d  k(t)

dt

(cid:88)

j

the form of these equations is analogous to the ones
of the original distributed contacts continuous spatial
sir model [42] (see below) but here with a discrete set
of spatial locations.
in the whole paper, we take a site independent value of
the recovering rate,   k =    for every site k. similarly,
the susceptibility is chosen site-independent,   k =   ,
except for some variants where a few sites are sin-
gularized, see section results, details: all of france,
d  epartement scale, below.
in the non-linear case, we choose parameters for   k(  )
in order to have a function (i) being zero when there
is no rioting activity; (ii) which saturates at a value
(smaller or equal to 1) at large argument; (iii) with a
monotonous increasing behavior giving a more or less
pronounced threshold e   ect (e.g. a sigmoidal shape).
this has to be done looking for the best compromise
between quality of    t and number of parameters (as
small as possible). we tested several sigmoidal func-
tions. for the    t of the paris area at the scale of the
municipalities, we made use of a variant with a strict
threshold:

         ck,   k(  ) = 0
   >   ck,   k(  ) =   k (1     exp     k (         ck))

(18a)

(18b)

(cid:40)

the    t being done with site-independent free param-
eters, this function thus contributes to three free pa-
rameters,   c,    and   .

choice of the weights

the best results are obtained for two options. one is
a power law decay with the distance:

wkj = (1 + dist(k, j)/d0)

     

(19)

where dist(k, j) is the distance between site k and site
j (see below for its computation). the second option

13

in order to test for the possible absence of geographic
dependency in the contagion process, we take as a    null
hypothesis    model a version of our model where the
weights wkj do not depend on the distance between
sites. in this version, a given site is concerned by what
is happening at its own location, and in an equally fash-
ion by what is happening elsewhere. mathematically,
we thus consider the following weights:

(cid:40)

wkj =

1,
  ,

if k = j
otherwise

(21)

where    is a constant term to be optimized as a free
parameter. apart from the choice of the weights, the
model is the same as the one corresponding to the re-
sults shown on fig. 4. optimization is done over all the
8 free parameters. the results for this model are shown
on supplementary fig. s5, to be compared with fig. 4.
as one would expect, this model does not generate any
wave: following the shock, all the riot curves happen
to peak at the same time. remarkably, assuming no
geographic e   ect in the interaction term does not sim-
ply a   ect the timing of the events: the model also fails
to account for the amplitudes of the rioting activities
(see supplementary fig. s5b).
for what concerns the statistical signi   cance, as ex-
pected from the comparison between the    gures, the
distance-independent null hypothesis model is far worse
than the model with geographic dependency, despite
the fact that it has one less free parameter. making
use of the akaike information criterion[47] (aic), the
di   erence in aic is    aic =    438, which corresponds
to a relative likelihood[48] of 9.0e     96. a similar con-
clusion is obtained from the bic criterion[49].
these results thus clearly underline the need for the
interaction term to depend on the distance, supporting
the view of a local contagion process.

classic sir model with densities

a more direct application of the classic sir model as
used for infectious diseases would have lead to consider
equations for densities of agents (instead of numbers of
agents). in the linear case, this leads to the following
equations for the   s and   s:

                                 

d  k(t)

dt

d  k(t)

dt

=          k(t) +      k(t)

wkj

=          k(t)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

j

j
  j(t)
nj

.

wkj

  j(t)
nj

(22a)

(22b)

where here    =   /  0, and nj is the size of the reference
population at location j. these equations should be
compared with eq. (17). note that the weights being
given by (20), the dependency in the population size
nj cannot be absorbed in the weights.

fitting this model with densities to the data leads to
a much lower likelihood value compared to the model
presented here. in the case of the    t of the whole dy-
namics at the scale of the d  epartements, the di   erence
in aic is    aic =    101, which corresponds to a rela-
tive likelihood of 9.6e     23.

links to the original spatially continuous
sir model

in the case of the linear approximation, the meta-
population sir model that we have introduced leads to
the set of equations (17) of a type similar to the space-
continuous non local (distributed contact) sir model.
with a view to describe the spreading of infections
in spatially distributed populations, kendall[41] intro-
duced in 1957 this non-local version of the kermack-
mckendrick sir model in the form of space-dependent
integro-di   erential equations. omitting the recovered
population r, the system in the s, i variables reads:

=      i(x, t) +   s(x, t)

k(x, y)i(y, t)dy

(23a)

=      s(x, t)

k(x, y)i(y, t)dy

(23b)

(cid:90)

where x     rn , with n = 1, 2, and here i(x, t) and
s(x, t) are densities of immune and susceptible individ-
uals. in the particular case of dimension n = 1, and
the space is homogeneous, meaning here that k(x, y)
is of the form k(x, y) = w(x     y), we know[42] that
there exist traveling waves of any speed larger than or
equal to some critical speed. furthermore, this crit-
ical traveling wave speed also yields the asymptotic
speed of spreading of the epidemic[50]. there have

                           

di(x, t)

dt

ds(x, t)

dt

(cid:90)

been many mathematical works on this system and on
various extensions[51, 18]. thus, at least in dimension
n = 1 and for homogeneous space, this non-local sys-
tem can generate traveling fronts for the density of sus-
ceptible individuals, hence the propagation of a    spike   
of infected individuals. although no proof exists in di-
mension n = 2, numerical simulations show that the
model can indeed generate waves[52, 53], as illustrated
by the supplementary videos 3 and 4, similar to the
way the riot spread around paris giving rise to the in-
formal notion of a riot wave.

however, the model we introduce here is more gen-
eral and di   ers from the kendall model in certain as-
pects.
indeed, rather than continuous and homoge-
neous, the spatial structure is discrete with heteroge-
neous sites. moreover, the set of equations here (23)
corresponds to the linear approximation (17), whereas
our general model involves a non-linear term. the
understanding of generalized traveling waves and the
speed of propagation in this general context are inter-
esting open mathematical problems.

more work is needed to assess the mathematical
properties of the speci   c family of non local contagion
models introduced here, that is de   ned on a discrete
network, with highly heterogeneous populations, and a
non-linear id203 of becoming infected.

date of the maximum

figures 2c and 4b show how well the model accounts
for the temporal unfolding of the riot activity, thanks
to a comparison between model and data of the date
when the riot activity peaks at each location. given
the noisy nature of the data, the empirical date of that
maximum itself is not well de   ned. for each site, we
estimated this date as the weighted average of the dates
of the 3 greatest values, weighted by those values. we
   lled in missing data values by linear interpolation.
for the contagion around paris, considering the 12
most active municipalities shown in fig. 2c, the cor-
relation coe   cient is r = 0.80, p = 0.0017. at the
scale of the whole country, fig. 4d, considering the
d  epartements having more than 60 events, the corre-
lation coe   cient is equal r = 0.77, with a p-value of
p = 5.2e     6. given the large di   erences in popula-
tion size, the weighted correlation is more appropriate
for comparing the timing of the riot activities. us-
ing weights equal to the population sizes, this yields a
weighted correlation coe   cient of r = 0.87, with a p-
value p < 1e    5 estimated with a bootstrap procedure.

14

non-free parameters: choice of the ref-
erence population

free parameters: numerical optimiza-
tion

populations statistics. for the choice of the ref-
erence population, we compared the use of various
speci   c populations, considering cross-linked database
that involve age, sex and diploma. the source of these
populations statistics is the insee, the french na-
tional institute carrying the national census (http:
//www.insee.fr/). for the period under considera-
tion, we used relevant data from 2006 since data from
2005 were not available.
when applying the model at the scale of d  epartements,
for each d  epartement the size of a given speci   c popu-
lation is computed as the sum of the sizes of the corre-
sponding populations of all its municipalities that are
under police authority.
choice of the reference population. working at
the scale of d  epartements, we found the best log-
likelihood when using as reference population the one
of males aged between 16 and 24 with no diploma, while
not attending school (see supplementary fig. s7). we
thus calibrated the susceptible population in (all vari-
ants of) the model by assuming that, for each site (mu-
nicipality or d  epartement), its size is proportional to
the one of the corresponding reference population.
in   uence on the results. the choice of the refer-
ence population has a major in   uence on the results.
we    nd that an improper choice cannot be compen-
sated by the optimization of the free parameters. as
an example when working at the scale of municipalities,
compare supplementary fig. s2, for which the refer-
ence population is the total population, with fig. 2a
and 2b.

non-free parameters: geographic data

the geographic data are taken from the collab-
orative project open street map (http://osm13.
openstreetmap.fr/~cquest/openfla/export/).
the distance dist(k, j) is taken as the one (in km) be-
tween the centroid of each site.
in the case of the
municipalities, the centroid is taken as the geographic
centroid computed with qgis[54].
in the case of
d  epartements, the centroid is computed as the weighted
centroid (weighted by the size of the reference popula-
tion) of all its municipalities that are under police au-
thority.
making use of these geographic data, all the maps
(fig. 2d and 3, and supplementary videos 1 and 2),
have been generated with the mapping toolbox of the
matlab[55] software.

the data    t makes use of the maximum likelihood
approach[56]. let us call x = {xk,i, k = 1 . . . k, i =
1 . . . 44} the data, where each xk,i     n corresponds to
the number of events for the site k at day i (i = 1
corresponding to october 26, 2005), and let    denote
the set of free parameters (e.g.    = {  , a,   0, d0,   ,   }
in the multi-sites linear case). assuming conditional
independence, we have:
p(x|  ) =

(cid:89)

(cid:89)

p(xk,i|  )

(24)

k

i

under the poisson noise hypothesis, the xk,i are pois-
son probabilistic realizations with mean (  k,i(  )+  bk):
p(xk,i|  ) =

exp(cid:0)     (  k,i(  ) +   bk)(cid:1)

(  k,i(  ) +   bk)xk,i

xk,i!

(25)
the log-likelihood, computed over all the sites under
consideration and over the whole period (44 days long)
for which we have data, thus writes:

(cid:88)

(cid:96)(  |x) = log p(x|  )
=

(cid:0)       k,i(  )       bk + xk,i log(  k,i(  ) +   bk)(cid:1)

k,i

   (cid:88)

log xk,i!

(26)

k,i

note that the last term in the right hand side does not
depend on the free parameters and we can thus ignore
it.
we performed the numerical maximization of the log-
likelihood using the interior point algorithm[57] imple-
mented in the matlab[55] fmincon function.

the method developed here allows one to explore
the possibility of predicting the future time course of
events based on the observation of the events up to
some date. preliminary results indicate that, once the
activity has reached its peak in the paris area, the pre-
diction in time and space of the riot dynamics for the
rest of france becomes quite accurate.

results, details: paris area, municipality
scale

for the results illustrated by the    gures in the paper,
we give here the free parameters numerical values ob-
tained from the maximum likelihood method in the
case of the    t at the scale of municipalities in   ile-de-
france. note that this optimization is computationally

15

demanding:
it requires to generate a large number of
times (of order of tens of thousands) the full dynamics
(44 days) with 2560 (2    1280) coupled equations. for
the choice of the function   , we tested the linear case
and several non-linear choices. results are presented
for the non-linear case, the function    being given by
(18). we    nd:    = 0.26, a = 5.5; for the power law de-
crease of the weights, d0 = 8. 10   3km,    = 0.67;   0 =
7.7/nmax, where nmax = 1174 is the maximum size of
the reference populations, the max being taken over all
  ile-de-france municipalities; for the parameters of the
non-linear function:    = 0.63,    = 1.27,   c = 0.06.
in supplementary table s1a we provide a summary
of the variants that we have explored, together with a
comparison according to the aic criterion.

results,
details:
d  epartement scale

all

of france,

we detail here the model options and the numerical re-
sults for the global model, considering each one of the
d  epartements of metropolitan france (except corsica
and paris, hence 93 d  epartements) as one homogeneous
site. we have thus 186 (2   93) coupled equations with
6 to 12 free parameters, depending on the choice of the
function    and of the number of speci   c susceptibili-
ties, see below and supplementary table s1b.
outliers. looking at the results for di   erent versions,
we observe some systematic discrepancy between data
and model for three d  epartements: 93, where the pre-
dicted activity is slightly too low and starts slightly too
late, and 13 and 62 where it is too high (see supplemen-
tary fig. s6b). actually, if one looks at the empirical
maximum number of events as a function of the size of
the reference population used for calibrating the sus-
ceptible population, these three d  epartements show up
as outliers: the riot intensity is signi   cantly di   erent
from what one would expect from the size of the poor
population. outliers are here de   ned as falling outside
the mean    3 standard deviations range when looking
at the residuals of the id75. if one consid-
ers 4 standard deviations from the mean, one only    nds
the d  epartement 13.
the cases of 93 and 13 are not surprising. d  epartement
93 is the one where the riots started, and has the high-
est concentration of deprived neighborhoods. inhabi-
tants are aware of this particularity and refer to their
common fate by putting forward their belonging to
the    neuf-trois    (nine-three, instead of ninety three).
events in d  epartement 13 are mainly those that oc-
curred in the city of marseille. despite a high level of
criminality, and large poor neighborhoods, the inhab-

itants consider that being    marseillais    comes before
being french, so that people might have felt less con-
cerned. the case of 62 (notably when compared to 59)
remains a puzzle for us.
we have tested the model calibration with variants hav-
ing possibly one more free parameter for each one of
these sites,   93,   62 and   13, allowing for a di   erent
value of the susceptibility than the one taken for the
rest of france. the quality of    t for di   erent options
(a single    value, a speci   c value   13, and 3 speci   c
values   93,   62 and   13) are shown on supplementary
table s1b. the best result (with a linear function   )
is obtained in the case of 3 speci   c values (with a total
of 9 free parameters).
function   . we also compared the choice of the lin-
ear function with the one of a non-linear function (still
with 3 speci   c    values). the best aic is obtained
with a non-linear   , with a total of 12 free parameters.
the main qualitative gains with this variant can be
seen comparing supplementary fig. s6c with supple-
mentary fig. s6a (which, for ease of comparison, repro-
duces fig. 4b): a slightly sharper increase at the begin-
ning for every site, and a better value of the maximum
activity in d  epartement 59. however, the maximum
values for d  epartements 94 and 95 are clearly better
predicted from the variant with only 9 free parameters.
apart from these main qualitative di   erences, the    ts
are essentially equivalent. we thus choose to present
the results for the simpler variant with 9 parameters
(with a linear function    and three speci   c    values).
parameterization and results. making use of
the linear choice for   , introducing one free param-
eter for each one of the sites 13, 62 and 93, and
using the weights given by an exponential decrease
plus a constant global value, eq.
(20), optimization
is thus done over the choice of 9 free parameters:
  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,   13,   62 and   93.
the numerical values of the free parameters obtained
after optimization are as follows:    = 0.41, a = 2.6;
  0 = 190/nmax, where here nmax = 15632 is the max-
imum size of the reference populations of all metropoli-
tan d  epartements; the susceptibility is found to be
   = 2. 10   3, except for three d  epartements as ex-
plained above. for these three d  epartements with a
speci   c susceptibility, one    nds about twice the com-
mon value for the d  epartement 93 (where riots started),
  93/       1.95, and about half for the d  epartement 62
and 13,   62/       0.47 and   13/       0.42.
for the weights chosen with an exponential decrease
plus a constant global value, eq. (20), d0 = 36 km,
   = 0.06. when using instead the power law decrease,
(19), one    nds that the    t is almost as good.
eq.

16

the exponent value is found to be    = 0.80, which
is similar to the value    = 0.67 found for the    t at
the scale of municipalities (restricted to   ile-de-france
r  egion). yet, these exponent values are much smaller
than the ones, between 1. and 2., found in the litera-
ture on social interactions as a function of geographical
distance[37, 38, 39]. a small value of    means a very
slow decrease, a hint to the need of keeping a non zero
value at very large distance. this can be seen as an-
other indication that the alternative choice with a long
range part, eq. (20), is more relevant, meaning that
both geographic proximity and long range interactions
matter.

minor sites: comparison with a constant
rate null-hypothesis

the model predicts that the minor sites, that is, those
where the number of events is very small (with a level
to be chosen, as discussed below) are hit by the wave,
with a very small amplitude and at the correct period
of time. this can be seen clearly on fig. 5b and sup-
plementary fig. s4a. when looking at these    gures,
one should keep in mind that the model predictions
represent the mean values of stochastic poisson point
processes. thus, for instance, for a given day, and a
given site, a value smaller than 1 for the poisson pa-
rameter    means that the most probable situation is no
event at all, and we expect, say, 0 or 1 event. yet, one
should ask whether the apparent agreement is purely
the result of chance. of course the    t for any one of
these minor sites, taken alone, is not signi   cant. what
matters here is the consistency of the global model with
the set of activities of all the minor sites.
in order to quantitatively evaluate the relevance of the
   t even for these minor sites, we confront the model
predictions against the predictions of a null model spe-
ci   c for this set of sites. we consider a constant rate
null-hypothesis model de   ned as a poisson noise model,
with a parameter for each site that is constant in time
(  k(t) =   k). this parameter is chosen to be the empir-
ical average number of events over the available period.
supplementary figure s4b provides the comparison in
terms of di   erence in aic criterion between the two
models. in this comparison, the aic of the epidemio-
logical model is obtained from its calibration over the
full set of d  epartements (see fig. 4). in the resulting
log-likelihood we only keep the terms that speci   cally
depend on the considered minor sites.
we    nd that, when considering the minor sites as those
with at most one event on any single day, the null
model is preferred to the epidemiological model. this

is not surprising given the level of noise in our dataset    
compare in particular the presence of a criminal back-
ground not associated with the riots, as discussed above
in section background activity. however, when con-
sidering the minor sites as those where the number of
events on any day does not exceed a value as low as two,
we    nd that the epidemiological model yields a better
account of the activity than the null model (supple-
mentary fig. s4b). this is all the more remarkable as
these sites have only a small in   uence on the calibra-
tion of the full model. indeed, their contribution to the
global model likelihood is small compared to the one of
the major sites which essentially drive the data    t. as
supplementary fig. s4b also shows, the gain in aic
increases rapidly when the number of events allowed
for de   ning the minor sites increases.

poisson noise assumption

in order to calibrate the model to the data, we assume
poisson statistics, although we do not claim that the
underlying process is exactly of poisson nature. how-
ever, it is a convenient working hypothesis for numeri-
cal reasons (see above free parameters: numerical opti-
mization). from a theoretical point of view, this choice
is a priori appropriate as we deal with discrete values
(often very small). in addition, we have seen that the
data suggests that a same kind of model is relevant
at di   erent scales: this points towards in   nitely divisi-
ble distributions, such as the poisson distribution     the
sum of several independent poisson processes still be-
ing a poisson process.
stationary tails statistics. we show here that the
statistics of the background activity (data in the tails
exhibiting a stationary behavior) are compatible with
the poisson hypothesis. under such a hypothesis, the
variance is equal to the mean. figure 6a shows that,
for each d  epartement, if we look at the last two weeks,
the variance/mean relationship is indeed in good agree-
ment with a poisson hypothesis.
as additional support to the poisson noise property,
fig. 6b shows a poissonness plot[58] for each of the
12 r  egions. for completeness, we recall the meaning
of a poissonness plot. one has a total number of ob-
servations n. each particular value x is observed a
certain number of times nx, hence an empirical fre-
quency of occurrence nx/n.
if the underlying pro-
cess is poisson with mean   , then one must have
log(x!nx/n) =       + x log(  ). thus, in that case, the
plot of the quantity log(x!nx/n) (the blue circles in
fig. 6b) as a function of x should fall along a straight
line with slope log(  ) and intercept       (the red lines

17

size of    uctuations (with respect to the mean). next,
we look where the actual data points (gray points on
fig. 7) lie with respect to the hdr. first, one sees that
the empirical    uctuations are in agreement with the
sizes of the hdrs (qualitatively, the points are spread
in the hdrs). second, remarkably, one    nds that the
percentage of data points outside the hdr is 9%, a
value indeed close to the expected value 100    95 = 5%
(expected if both the    t is good and the noise is pois-
son). this however slightly larger value could be due
to statistical    uctuations. yet, a closer look at the
plots suggest a few large deviations, such as day 2 in
d  epartement 69, that might correspond to true idiosyn-
crasies, cases which cannot be reproduced by the model
and show up as particular deviations to the       rst order
scenario    we present.
in addition to this analysis, to get more intuition on
what poisson    uctuations may produce, we generated
arti   cial data that are poisson probabilistic realizations
given a certain underlying mean   . fig. 8 present two
illustrative cases, where the   s are taken as the outcome
of the    t for d  epartements 93 and 76. in each case, four
di   erent probabilistic realizations are shown.

figure 7: same    gure as fig. 4b with highest density
regions (hdr). the light orange areas correspond to
the 95% highest density regions.

figure 6: test of poisson statistics assumption.
(a)
mean and variance computed on the tail of the data
(taken as the last two available weeks considered as
background noise, without rioting activity). each cir-
cle corresponds to one d  epartement. for comparison,
we generated fake poisson data mimicking the typical
values observed in the dataset: the gray dots give the
sample mean and variance for 14 realizations of 1000
poisson processes, with true means randomly generated
between 0 and 10. (b) for each r  egion, poissonness plot
computed for the tail of the data. see supplementary
table s2 for more details on the r  egions.

on fig. 6b).
poisson realizations and highest density re-
gions. we remind that we consider the observed data
as probabilistic realizations of an underlying poisson
process, whose mean   (t) is the outcome of the model
   t. to have a better grasp on the meaning of such data
   t, as a complement to fig. 4b, we provide fig. 7. on
this    gure we have plotted the 95% highest density
regions [59] (hdr, light orange areas) along with the
means   (t) (red curves) of the poisson processes. the
rational is as follows. from    tting the model, for each
site and for each date, we have a value of   .
if one
draws a large number of realizations of a poisson pro-
cess with this mean value   , one will    nd that 95% of
the points lie within the corresponding 95% hdr. more
precisely, a 95% highest density region corresponds to
the interval of shortest length with a id203 cov-
erage of 95% [59].
for each value of the set of   s, outcome of the    t with
the global, non local, model, we estimated the corre-
sponding 95% hdr thanks to a monte carlo proce-
dure. these regions are shown as light orange areas
on fig. 7. these hdr allow to visualize the expected

18

a012345678mean012345678varianceb051001020ara0246-1012bfc024-1.5-1-0.5bre0246-2-1012cvl24681012051015ges101520251020304050hdf102030204060idf05100510nor0246-2-1012naq2468100510occ02468-2024pdl2468101214051015pac                               0510151302040605905101562010206901020760204077020407801020309110/2711/1712/08020409210/2711/1712/080501009310/2711/1712/08020409410/2711/1712/080204095riot eventsdatefigure 8: surrogate data: examples of poisson sam-
ples (open circles) for two examples of rate curves (red
curves). these curves are taken from the model    t,
top: for d  epartement 93, bottom: for d  epartement 76.
in each case, four di   erent probabilistic realizations of
poisson noise are shown. the light orange areas are
the 95% highest density regions.

data availability

the dataset used for this work is available from the
corresponding author on reasonable request, and under
the condition of proper referencing.

acknowledgements

this paper bene   ted from the critical reading by sev-
eral colleagues from various    elds, as well as from
useful remarks of anonymous referees. all the maps
(fig.
2d and 3, and supplementary videos 1 and
2), have been generated thanks to the open street
map data c(cid:13)openstreetmap contributors (https://
www.openstreetmap.org/copyright). this work re-
ceived support from: the european research coun-
cil advanced grant erc readi (european union   s
7th framework programme fb/2007-13/, erc grant
agreement no 321186 held by h. berestycki); the
cnrs interdisciplinary programs, peps humain and
peps momis; the program syscomm of the french
national research agency, the anr (project dyxi,
grant anr-08-sysc-0008) . n.r. was supported by
the nsf grant dms-1516778.

author contributions statement

s.r. collected the raw data and provided the sociologi-
cal expertise; m.-a.d. and m.b.g. built the database;
l.b-g, j.-p.n, h.b. and n.r. were involved in the
mathematical modeling; l.b-g performed the numeri-
cal analyses and simulations; l.b-g, j.-p.n, h.b. and
s.r. wrote the paper with input from all the authors.
all authors reviewed the manuscript.

references

[1] d. waddington, f. jobard, and m. king, rioting in the
uk and france: a comparative analysis. cullompton,
devon: willan publishing, 2009.

[2] s. roch  e,    the nature of rioting. comparative re   ec-
tions based on the french case study.,    in transna-
tional criminology manual (m. herzog-evans, ed.),
(nijmegen), pp. 155   170, wolf legal publishers, 2010.

[3] c. cazelles, b. morel, and s. roch  e,    les violences
urbaines de l   automne 2005:   ev  enements, acteurs: dy-
namiques et interactions. essai de synth`ese,    centre
d   analyse strat  egique, 2007.

[4] r. m. raafat, n. chater, and c. frith,    herding in
humans,    trends in cognitive sciences, vol. 13, no. 10,
pp. 420   428, 2009.

[5] m. gross,    why do people riot?,    current biology,

vol. 21, no. 18, pp. r673   r676, 2011.

[6] m. j. a. stark, w. j. raine, s. l. burbeck, and k. k.
davison,    some empirical patterns in a riot process,   
american sociological review, pp. 865   876, 1974.

[7] m. granovetter,    threshold models of collective be-
havior,    american journal of sociology, vol. 83, no. 6,
pp. 1360   1380, 1978.

[8] s. l. burbeck, w. j. raine, and m. a. stark,    the dy-
namics of riot growth: an epidemiological approach,   
journal of mathematical sociology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1   
22, 1978.

[9] b. l. pitcher, r. l. hamblin, and j. l. miller,    the
di   usion of collective violence,    american sociological
review, pp. 23   35, 1978.

[10] d. j. myers,    the di   usion of collective violence: in-
fectiousness, susceptibility, and mass media networks,   
american journal of sociology, vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 173   
208, 2000.

[11] d. braha,    global civil unrest:

self-
organization, and prediction,    plos one, vol. 7, no. 10,
p. e48596, 2012.

contagion,

[12] p. baudains, a. braithwaite, and s. d. johnson,    tar-
get choice during extreme events: a discrete spatial
choice model of the 2011 london riots,    criminology,
vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 251   285, 2013.

[13] p. baudains, s. d. johnson, and a. m. braithwaite,
   geographic patterns of di   usion in the 2011 london
riots,    applied geography, vol. 45, no. 0, pp. 211     219,
2013.

[14] t. p. davies, h. m. fry, a. g. wilson, and s. r.
bishop,    a mathematical model of the london riots
and their policing,    scienti   c reports, vol. 3, 2013.

[15] h. berestycki., j. nadal, and n. rodriguez,    a model
of riots dynamics: shocks, di   usion and thresholds,   
networks and heterogeneous media (nhm), vol. 10,
no. 3, pp. 443   475, 2015.

19

10/2711/1712/080102010/2711/1712/080102010/2711/1712/080102010/2711/1712/0801020050100050100050100050100simulated number of eventsdate[16] m. salgado, a. mascare  no, g. ruz, and j.-p. nadal,
   models of contagion: towards a theory of crises prop-
agation,    submitted, 2016.

[17] k. dietz,    epidemics and rumours: a survey,    journal
of the royal statistical society. series a (general),
pp. 505   528, 1967.

[18] l. wang and b. c. wood,    an epidemiological ap-
proach to model the viral propagation of memes,    ap-
plied mathematical modelling, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 5442   
5447, 2011.

[19] m. i. midlarsky,    analyzing di   usion and contagion
e   ects: the urban disorders of the 1960s,    american
political science review, vol. 72, no. 03, pp. 996   1008,
1978.

[20] r. m. govea and g. t. west,    riot contagion in latin
america, 1949-1963,    journal of con   ict resolution,
vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 349   368, 1981.

[21] j. bohstedt and d. e. williams,    the di   usion of riots:
the patterns of 1766, 1795, and 1801 in devonshire,   
the journal of interdisciplinary history, vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 1   24, 1988.

[22] a. charlesworth,    the spatial di   usion of riots: pop-
ular disturbances in england and wales, 1750   1850,   
rural history, vol. 5, no. 01, pp. 1   22, 1994.

[23] d. myers,    violent protest and heterogeneous di   usion
processes: the spread of us racial rioting from 1964
to 1971,    mobilization: an international quarterly,
vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 289   321, 2010.

[24] m. mazars,    les violences urbaines de l   automne 2005
vues du palais de justice. etude de cas. les proc  edures
judiciaires engag  ees au tribunal de grande instance de
bobigny.,    centre d   analyse strat  egique, 2007.

[30] w. o. kermack and a. g. mckendrick,    a contri-
bution to the mathematical theory of epidemics,    in
proceedings of the royal society of london a: math-
ematical, physical and engineering sciences, vol. 115,
pp. 700   721, the royal society, 1927.

[31] o. diekmann and h. heesterbeek, mathematical epi-
demiology of infectious diseases: model building,
analysis and interpretation. new york: wiley, 2000.

[32] h. w. hethcote,    the mathematics of infectious dis-
eases,    siam review, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 599   653, 2000.

[33] j. earl, a. martin, j. d. mccarthy, and s. a. soule,
   the use of newspaper data in the study of collective
action,    annu. rev. sociol., vol. 30, pp. 65   80, 2004.

[34] a. baddeley, spatial point processes and their appli-
cations, pp. 1   75. berlin, heidelberg: springer, 2007.

[35] f. ball, t. britton, t. house, v. isham, d. molli-
son, l. pellis, and g. s. tomba,    seven challenges for
metapopulation models of epidemics, including house-
holds models,    epidemics, vol. 10, pp. 63   67, 2015.

[36] t. c. schelling,    hockey helmets, concealed weapons,
and daylight saving: a study of binary choices with
externalities,    the journal of con   ict resolution,
vol. xvii (3), 1973.

[37] d. liben-nowell, j. novak, r. kumar, p. raghavan,
and a. tomkins,    geographic routing in social net-
works,    proceedings of the national academy of sci-
ences of the united states of america, vol. 102, no. 33,
pp. 11623   11628, 2005.

[38] r. lambiotte, v. d. blondel, c. de kerchove,
e. huens, c. prieur, z. smoreda, and p. van dooren,
   geographical dispersal of mobile communication net-
works,    physica a: statistical mechanics and its ap-
plications, vol. 387, no. 21, pp. 5317   5325, 2008.

[25] d. strang and n. b. tuma,    spatial and temporal het-
erogeneity in di   usion,    american journal of sociol-
ogy, vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 614   639, 1993.

[39] j. goldenberg and m. levy,    distance is not dead:
social interaction and geographical distance in the in-
ternet era,    arxiv preprint arxiv:0906.3202, 2009.

[26] d. j. myers,    racial rioting in the 1960s: an event
history analysis of local conditions,    american socio-
logical review, pp. 94   112, 1997.

[27] g. o. mohler, m. b. short, p. j. brantingham, f. p.
schoenberg, and g. e. tita,    self-exciting point pro-
cess modeling of crime,    journal of the american sta-
tistical association, vol. 106, no. 493, pp. 100   108,
2011.

[28] p. j. brantingham, g. e. tita, m. b. short, and s. e.
reid,    the ecology of gang territorial boundaries,   
criminology, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 851   885, 2012.

[29] l. gauvin, a. vignes, and j.-p. nadal,    modeling ur-
ban housing market dynamics: can the socio-spatial
segregation preserve some social diversity?,    journal
of economic dynamics and control, vol. 37, no. 7,
pp. 1300   1321, 2013.

[40] r. braun and r. koopmans,    the di   usion of ethnic
violence in germany: the role of social similarity,    eu-
ropean sociological review, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 111   123,
2010.

[41] d. g. kendall,    discussion of    measles periodicity and
community size    by m.s. bartlett,    journal of the
royal statistical society series a, vol. 120, pp. 64   67,
1957.

[42] d. g. kendall,    mathematical models of the spread of
infection,    mathematics and computer science in biol-
ogy and medicine, vol. 213, 1965.

[43] m. emirbayer and j. goodwin,    network analysis, cul-
ture, and the problem of agency,    american journal of
sociology, pp. 1411   1454, 1994.

[44] r. v. gould,    why do networks matter? rationalist
and structuralist interpretations,    in social movements

20

and networks: relational approaches to collective ac-
tion (m. diani and d. mcadam, eds.), pp. 233   57,
oxford: oxford university press, 2003.

[45] s. walgrave and r. wouters,    the missing link in the
di   usion of protest: asking others,    american journal
of sociology, vol. 119, no. 6, pp. 1670   1709, 2014.

[46] g. l. carter,    local police force size and the severity
of the 1960s black rioting,    journal of con   ict reso-
lution, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 601   614, 1987.

[47] h. akaike,    a new look at the statistical model iden-
ti   cation,    ieee transactions on automatic control,
vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 716   723, 1974.

[48] k. p. burnham and d. r. anderson, model selection
and multimodel id136: a practical information-
theoretic approach. springer science & business media,
2003.

[49] g. schwarz et al.,    estimating the dimension of a
model,    the annals of statistics, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 461   
464, 1978.

[50] d. aronson,    the asymptotic speed of propagation
of a simple epidemic,    in nonlinear di   usion, vol. 14,
pp. 1   23, pitman london, 1977.

[51] s. ruan,    spatial-temporal dynamics in nonlocal epi-
demiological models,    in mathematics for life science
and medicine, pp. 97   122, springer, 2007.

[52] n. t. bailey,    the simulation of stochastic epidemics
in two dimensions,    in proceedings of the fifth berke-
ley symposium on mathematical statistics and prob-
ability, vol. 4, pp. 237   257, university of california
press berkeley and los angeles, 1967.

[53] m. rodr    guez-meza,    spatial and temporal dynamics
of infected populations: the mexican epidemic,    re-
vista mexicana de f    sica, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 58   62,
2012.

[54] qgis development team, qgis geographic informa-
tion system. open source geospatial foundation,
2009.

[55] matlab, version 9.0.0 (r2016a). the mathworks

inc., natick, massachusetts, 2016.

[56] i. j. myung,    tutorial on maximum likelihood esti-
mation,    journal of mathematical psychology, vol. 47,
no. 1, pp. 90   100, 2003.

[57] r. h. byrd, m. e. hribar, and j. nocedal,    an inte-
rior point algorithm for large-scale nonlinear program-
ming,    siam journal on optimization, vol. 9, no. 4,
pp. 877   900, 1999.

[58] d. c. hoaglin,    a poissonness plot,    the american

statistician, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 146   149, 1980.

[59] r. j. hyndman,    computing and graphing highest
density regions,    the american statistician, vol. 50,
no. 2, pp. 120   126, 1996.

21

supplementary information

supplementary figures

figure s1: the 2005 french riots: data and single site    ts for the 12 most active   ile-de-
france municipalities. dots: number of events. continuous curve:    t with the single site
sir model.

22

10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/0800.511.522.53riot eventsmeaux10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/08012345riot eventsmantes la jolie10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/0801234riot eventsgrigny10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/0801234riot eventsnanterre10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/080246810riot eventsaulnay sous bois10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/080246riot eventsbobigny10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/08024681012riot eventsclichy sous bois10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/0801234riot eventssaint denis10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/0801234riot eventssevran10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/08012345riot eventsstains10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/080246riot eventschampigny sur marne10/2711/0311/1011/1711/2412/0112/08012345riot eventsargenteuila

b

figure s2: control numerical experiment:    t with an inadequate reference population.
here the reference population is taken as the total population. (a)   ile-de-france munici-
palities (aggregated by d  epartements): data (dots), model (continuous curve) making use
of the inadequate reference population. (b) total number of events, model vs. data. each
dot represents one municipality. these results should be compared with the one on fig.
2 of the main text     apart from the choice of a di   erent reference population, the model
options (choice of    and of the weights) are the same.

23

0204060807702040608078020406080910204060809210/2711/170204060809310/2711/170204060809410/2711/1702040608095riot eventsdate0204060data0204060modelfigure s3: results: all of france, spatial sir model, calibration at the scale of the
d  epartements. results aggregated by    r  egions    (as of 2016), taking into account all the
d  epartements. see main text, section fitting the data: the wave across the whole country.
see supplementary table s2 for more details on the r  egions.

24

02040ara051015bfc02468bre051015cvl0102030ges020406080hdf0100200idf0102030nor01020naq10/2711/1701020occ10/2711/170510pdl10/2711/170102030pacriot eventsdatea

b

figure s4: results, calibration at the scale of the d  epartements: minor sites. even where
the number of events is very small, the model predicts the sites to be hit by the wave, with
a small amplitude and at the correct period of time. (a) all the sites where the number
of events on any given day is inferior or equal to 2. (b) comparison between our model
and a constant rate null-hypothesis model. the y-axis corresponds to the di   erence in
akaike information criterion. a negative value of    aic means a better performance of
our contagion model. the x-axis indicates the maximum activity considered (ie all the
sites with maximum daily activity inferior or equal to the corresponding value are used in
the computation of the di   erence in aic). for more details, see main text, materials and
methods, section minor sites: comparison with a constant rate null-hypothesis.

25

00.51400.5150127012800.5190121000.511200.511501216011700.511900.51230122400.5132012360124000.514300.514600.514801250012530125501261012650126601270012720127310/2711/1700.517910/2711/170128210/2711/170128510/2711/1701287riot eventsdate123456789max activity-800-700-600-500-400-300-200-1000100a

b

figure s5: distance-independent null hypothesis model. this    gure, to be compared with
fig. 4, main text, shows that the absence of geographic dependency in the contagion
process fails to reproduce the wave, but also to account for the amplitudes of the riots (see
materials and methods for details). plotted here: all of france, model calibration at the
scale of the d  epartements. (a) time course of the riots in france: data (dots) and model
(continuous curves). only the 12 most active d  epartements are shown.
(b) temporal
unfolding (date when the number of riot events reaches its maximum value), shown for the
d  epartements having more than 60 events. each blue circle has a diameter proportional
to the reference population of the corresponding d  epartements. the red lines depict the
identity diagonal line.

26

0101305059051062010206901020760207702078010209110/2711/170209210/2711/170509310/2711/17020409410/2711/1702095riot eventsdate11/0311/10data11/0311/10modela

b

c

figure s6: model variants. all of france, model calibration at the scale of the
d  epartements. (a) for ease of comparison, reproduction of fig. 4b (model with 9 free
parameters); (b) and (c), same model as (a), except: (b) no extra speci   c susceptibility
value    (6 free parameters), (c) the use of a sigmoidal function for    (12 free parameters).

27

0101305059051062010206901020760207702078010209110/2711/170209210/2711/170509310/2711/17020409410/2711/1702095riot eventsdate01020130505901062010206901020760207702078010209110/2711/170209210/2711/170509310/2711/17020409410/2711/1702095riot eventsdate0101305059051062010206901020760207702078010209110/2711/170209210/2711/170509310/2711/17020409410/2711/1702095riot eventsdatefigure s7: choice of the reference population. model comparison, considering cross-linked
database that involve age, sex and diploma (insee statistics of 2006). all of france, model
calibration at the scale of the d  epartements. for each point, the model is the minimal one,
using the 6 free parameters   , a,   0, d0,   ,   , and the corresponding reference population.
for the akaike information criterion (aic), the lower is the better. diploma categories:
1, no diploma; from 2 to 6, higher and higher levels of education, with 5, high school
diploma, 6 university diploma (speci   c french levels: 2: cep; 3: bepc; 4: cap-bep; 5:
bac g  en  eral, bac technique; 6: dipl  ome universitaire 1er, 2`eme ou 3`eme cycle, bts-dut).

28

123456diploma91009200930094009500960097009800aicmale 16-24male  25female 16-24female  25supplementary tables

description of the model

model presented in the paper (see fig. 2)
   strict threshold, weights wkj power law
same, but with    linear
same, but with weights wkj exponential decay + constant

same, but with total population as reference population
(see fig. s2)

number of free
parameters
8

6
8

8

list of parameters

  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,   ,
  c
  , a,   0, d0,   ,   
  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,   ,
  c
  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,   ,
  c

aic

9718

9789
9738

10055

(a) model comparison.   ile-de-france r  egion, model calibration at the scale of municipalities.

description of the model

model presented in the paper (see fig. 4)
   linear, weights wkj exponential decay + constant
outliers de   ned with a three standard deviations criterion
same, but weights wkj power law

same, but weights wkj self vs rest
(distance-independent null hypothesis model see fig. s5)
same, but with densities instead of numbers

same, but no extra susceptibility value    (see fig. s6b)
same, but with one susceptibility value   
outliers de   ned with a four standard deviations criterion
same, but with    sigmoidal
(see fig. s6c)

number of free
parameters
9

list of parameters

aic

  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,
  13,   62,   93

8979

9

8

9

6
7

12

  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,
  13,   62,   93
  , a,   0,   ,   ,   13,
  62,   93
  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,
  13,   62,   93
  , a,   0, d0,   ,   
  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,
  13
  , a,   0, d0,   ,   ,    ,
  ,   c,   13,   62,   93

9000

9419

9080

9133
9058

8923

(b) model comparison. all of france, model calibration at the scale of the d  epartements.

table 1: summary of miscellaneous model variants that were tested. in both sub-tables,    same    means same
model as the one presented in the main text and described in the    rst row, except for the described option. see
material and methods for more details. for convenience, we give below a brief reminder of the equations of some
j wkj  j(t)), and for the function    used to model the

options for the interaction weights (wkj in   k(t) = (cid:80)

id203 for a susceptible agent to become a rioter.
function   :

    linear:   (  ) =     
    strict threshold:   (  ) = 0 if          c;   (  ) =    (1     exp      (         c)) if    >   c
    sigmoidal:   (  ) =   (1     exp        ) (1     exp      (         c))
    power law: wkj = (1 + dist(k, j)/d0)
    exponential decay + constant: wkj =    + (1       ) exp (   dist(k, j)/d0)
    self vs rest: wkj = 1 if j = k; wkj =    otherwise.

   1

     

weights:

29

bourgogne-franche-comt  e

full name

code
ara auvergne-rh  one-alpes
bfc
bre bretagne
cvl centre-val de loire
ges grand est
hdf hauts-de-france
idf
nor normandie
naq nouvelle-aquitaine
occ occitanie
pdl
pac

  ile-de-france

pays de la loire
provence-alpes-c  ote d   azur

d  epartements
01 03 07 15 26 38 42 43 63 69 73 74
21 25 39 58 70 71 89 90
22 29 35 56
18 28 36 37 41 45
08 10 51 52 54 55 57 67 68 88
02 59 60 62 80
75 77 78 91 92 93 94 95
14 27 50 61 76
16 17 19 23 24 33 40 47 64 79 86 87
09 11 12 30 31 32 34 46 48 65 66 81 82
44 49 53 72 85
04 05 06 13 83 84

table 2: code iso 3166-2 (without the pre   x fr-) and associated name of the 12 r  egions of metropolitan france
(as of 2016, excluding corsica), along with the id number of the d  epartements that they encompass.
for the iso codes, see https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:code:3166:fr.

30

supplementary videos
    supplementary video 1. riot propagation around
paris: smoothed data.
this video shows the riot propagation around paris. the
map shows the municipality boundaries, with paris at the
center. for each municipality for which data is available,
a circle is drawn with an area proportional to the estimate
of the size of the susceptible population (see main text,
section methods). instead of making use of the raw data,
for each municipality we replaced each day value by the
one given by the    t with the single site epidemic model
considered here as a tool for smoothing the data. the color
represents the intensity of the rioting activity: the warmer
the color, the higher the activity. the pace of the video
corresponds to three days per second. in order to improve
the    uidity of the video, we increased the number of frames
per second by interpolating each day with 7 new frames,
whose values are computed thanks to a piece-wise cubic
interpolation of the original ones. the resulting frame rate
is then 24 frames per second.
the maps have been generated with the mapping
toolbox of the matlab software making use of the
open street map data c(cid:13)openstreetmap contributors
(https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright).
the video is encoded with the open standard h.264.
    supplementary video 2. riot propagation around
paris: model with non-local contagion.
this video shows the riot activity as predicted by the
data-driven global epidemic-like model. same technical
details as for the si video 1.
the maps have been generated with the mapping
toolbox of the matlab software making use of the
open street map data c(cid:13)openstreetmap contributors
(https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright).
the video is encoded with the open standard h.264.
    supplementary video 3. spatial sir: wave propaga-
tion in a homogeneous medium.
we illustrate the formal continuous spatial sir model
with a video showing the propagation of a wave. the
underlying medium is characterized by a uniform density
of susceptible individuals. the weights w(x     y) in the
interaction term are given by a decreasing exponential
function of the euclidean distance ||x     y||.
the video is encoded with the open standard h.264.
    supplementary video 4. spatial sir: wave propaga-
tion in a non-homogeneous medium.
same as si video 3, but with a heterogeneous density of
susceptible individuals, characterized by (1) a decrease of
the density towards 0 near the boundary of the image, so
that the wave dies before leaving the frame, (2) a hole at
the center, which is then bypassed by the wave, (3) a con-
centration of susceptible individuals that globally decreases
on the y-axis, so that the wave dies while going downward.
the video is encoded with the open standard h.264.

still image from si video 1

still image from si video 2

still image from si video 3

still image from si video 4

31

