phrase-based image captioning

r  emi lebret1 & pedro o. pinheiro1
idiap research institute, martigny, switzerland
  ecole polytechnique f  ed  erale de lausanne (epfl), lausanne, switzerland
ronan collobert2
facebook ai research, menlo park, ca, usa

remi@lebret.ch, pedro@opinheiro.com

ronan@collobert.com

5
1
0
2

 
r
p
a
9

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
1
7
6
3
0

.

2
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

generating a novel textual description of an im-
age is an interesting problem that connects com-
puter vision and natural language processing. in
this paper, we present a simple model that is able
to generate descriptive sentences given a sample
image. this model has a strong focus on the syn-
tax of the descriptions. we train a purely bilinear
model that learns a metric between an image rep-
resentation (generated from a previously trained
convolutional neural network) and phrases that
are used to described them. the system is then
able to infer phrases from a given image sam-
ple. based on caption syntax statistics, we pro-
pose a simple language model that can produce
relevant descriptions for a given test image us-
ing the phrases inferred. our approach, which is
considerably simpler than state-of-the-art mod-
els, achieves comparable results in two popular
datasets for the task: flickr30k and the recently
proposed microsoft coco.

1. introduction
being able to automatically generate a description from an
image is a fundamental problem in arti   cial intelligence,
connecting id161 and natural language process-
ing. the problem is particularly challenging because it
requires to correctly recognize different objects in images
and how they interact. another challenge is that an image
description generator needs to express these interactions in
a natural language (e.g. english). therefore, a language
model is implicitly required in addition to visual under-
standing.
recently, this problem has been studied by many different

1these two authors contributed equally to this work.
2all research was conducted before ronan collobert joined face-
book ai research.

authors. most of the attempts are based on recurrent neu-
ral networks to generate sentences. these models lever-
age the power of neural networks to transform image and
sentence representations into a common space (mao et al.,
2014; karpathy & fei-fei, 2014; vinyals et al., 2014; don-
ahue et al., 2014).
in this paper, we propose a different approach to the prob-
lem that does not rely on complex recurrent neural net-
works. an exploratory analysis of two large datasets of
image descriptions reveals that their syntax is quite sim-
ple. the ground-truth descriptions can be represented as a
collection of noun, verb and prepositional phrases. the dif-
ferent objects in a given image are described by the noun
phrases, while the interactions between these objects are
encoded by both the verb and the prepositional phrases. we
thus train a model that predicts the set of phrases present in
the sentences used to describe the images. by leveraging
previous works on word vector representations, each phrase
can be represented by the mean of the representations of the
words that compose the phrase. vector representations for
images can also be easily obtained from some pre-trained
convolutional neural networks. the model then learns a
common embedding between phrase and image represen-
tations (see figure 3).
given a test image, a bilinear model is trained to predict
a set of top-ranked phrases that best describe it. several
noun phrases, verb phrases and prepositional phrases are
in this set. the objective is therefore to generate syntac-
tically correct sentences from (possibly different) subsets
of these phrases. we introduce a trigram constrained lan-
guage model based on our knowledge about how the sen-
tence descriptions are structured in the training set. with a
very constrained decoding scheme, sentences are inferred
with a id125. because these sentences are not con-
ditioned to the given image (apart with the initial phrases
selection), a re-ranking is used to pick the sentence that is
closest to the sample image (according to the learned met-
ric). the quality of our sentence generation is evaluated

phrase-based image captioning

on two very popular datasets for the task: flickr30k (ho-
dosh et al., 2013) and the recently published coco (lin
et al., 2014). using the popular id7 score (papineni
et al., 2002), our results are competitive with other recent
works. our generated sentences also achieve a similar per-
formance as humans on the id7 metric.
the paper is organized as follows. section 2 presents re-
lated works. section 3 presents the analysis we conducted
to better understand the syntax of image descriptions. sec-
tion 4 describes the proposed phrase-based model. sec-
tion 5 introduces the sentence generation from the pre-
dicted phrases. section 6 describes our experimental setup
and the results on the two datasets. section 7 concludes.

2. related works
the classical approach to sentence generation is to pose the
problem as a retrieval problem: a given test image will be
described with the highest ranked annotation in the train-
ing set (hodosh et al., 2013; socher et al., 2014; srivas-
tava & salakhutdinov, 2014). these matching methods
may not generate proper descriptions for a new combina-
tion of objects. due to this limitation, several generative
approaches have been proposed. many of them use syntac-
tic and semantic constraints in the generation process (yao
et al., 2010; mitchell et al., 2012; kulkarni et al., 2011;
kuznetsova et al., 2012). these approaches bene   t from
visual recognition systems to infer words or phrases, but
in contrast to our work they do not leverage a multimodal
metric between images and phrases.
more recently, automatic image sentence description ap-
proaches based on deep neural networks have emerged with
the release of new large datasets. as starting point, these
solutions use the rich representation of images generated
by convolutional neural networks (lecun et al., 1998)
(id98) that were previously trained for object recognition
tasks. these id98 are generally followed by recurrent neu-
ral networks (id56) in order to generate full sentence de-
scriptions (vinyals et al., 2014; karpathy & fei-fei, 2014;
donahue et al., 2014; chen & zitnick, 2014; mao et al.,
2014; venugopalan et al., 2014; kiros et al., 2014). among
these recent works, long short-term memory (lstm) is of-
ten chosen as id56. in such approaches, the key point is
to learn a common space between images and words or be-
tween images and sentences, i.e. a multimodal embedding.
vinyals et al. (2014) consider the problem in a similar way
as a machine translation problem. the authors propose
an encoder/decoder (id98/id137) system that is
trained to maximize the likelihood of the target descrip-
tion sentence given a training image. karpathy & fei-fei
(2014) propose an approach that is a combination of id98,
bidirectional id56 over sentences and a structured objec-

tive responsible for a multimodal embedding. they then
propose a second id56 architecture to generate new sen-
tences. similarly, mao et al. (2014) and donahue et al.
(2014) propose a system that uses a id98 to extract image
features and a id56 for sentences. the two networks inter-
act with each other in a multimodal common layer.
our model shares some similarities with these recent pro-
posed approaches. we also use a pre-trained id98 to ex-
tract image features. however, thanks to the phrase-based
approach, our model does not rely on complex recurrent
networks for sentence generation, and we do not    ne-tune
the image features.
as our approach, fang et al. (2014) proposes to not use
recurrent networks for generating the sentences. their so-
lution can be divided into three steps: (i) a visual detector
for words that commonly occur are trained using multiple
instance learning, (ii) a set of sentences are generated us-
ing a maximum-id178 language model and (iii) the set
of sentences is re-ranked using sentence-level features and
a proposed deep multimodal similarity model. our work
differs from this approach in two different important ways:
our model infers phrases present in the sentences instead of
words and we use a considerably simpler language model.

3. syntax analysis of image descriptions
the art of writing sentences can vary a lot according to the
domain. when reporting news or reviewing an item, not
only the choice of the words might vary, but also the gen-
eral structure of the sentence. in this section, we wish to an-
alyze the syntax of image descriptions to identify whether
images have their own structures. we therefore proceed to
an exploratory analysis of two recent datasets containing a
large amount of images with descriptions: flickr30k (ho-
dosh et al., 2013) and coco (lin et al., 2014).

3.1. datasets

the flickr30k dataset contains 31,014 images where 1,014
images are for validation, 1,000 for testing and the rest for
training (i.e. 29,000 images). the coco dataset contains
123,287 images, 82,783 training images and 40,504 val-
idation images. the testing images has not yet been re-
leased. we thus use two sets of 5,000 images from the
validation images for validation and test, as in karpathy &
fei-fei (2014)2. in both datasets, images are given with
   ve (or six) sentence descriptions annotated using amazon
mechanical turk. this results in 559,113 sentences when
combining both training datasets.

2available

at http://cs.stanford.edu/people/

karpathy/deepimagesent/

phrase-based image captioning

figure 1. statistics on the number of phrases (np, vp, pp)
per ground-truth descriptions in flickr30k and coco training
datasets.

3.2. chunking-based approach

a quick overview over these sentence descriptions reveals
that they all share a common structure, usually describing
the different objects present in the image and how they in-
teract between each other. this interaction among objects
is described as actions or relative position between differ-
ent objects. the sentence can be short or long, but it gener-
ally respects this process. to con   rm this claim and better
understand the description structures, we used a chunking
(also called id66) approach which identi   es the
constituents of a sentence. these constituents are usually
noun phrases (np), verb phrases (vp) and prepositional
phrases (pp). we extract them from the training sentences
with the senna software3. pre-verbal and post-verbal ad-
verb phrases are merged with verb phrases to limit the num-
ber of phrase types.
statistics reported in figure 1 and figure 2 con   rm that
image descriptions possess a simple and distinct structure.
these sentences do not have much variability. all the key
elements in a given image are usually described with a
noun phrase (np). interactions between these elements can
then be explained using prepositional phrases (pp) or verb
phrases (vp). a large majority of sentences contain from
two to four noun phrases. two noun phrases then interact
using a verb or prepositional phrase. describing an image
is therefore just a matter of identifying these constituents.
we thus propose to train a model which can predict the
phrases which are likely to be in a given image.

figure 2. the 20 most frequent sentence structures in flickr30k
and coco training datasets. the black line is the appearance
frequency for each structure, the red line is the cumulative distri-
bution.

4. phrase-based model for image

descriptions

by leveraging previous works on word and image represen-
tations, we propose a simple model which can predict the
phrases that best describe a given image. for this purpose,
a metric between images and phrases is trained, as illus-
trated in figure 3. the proposed architecture is then just a
low-rank bilinear model u t v .

4.1. image representations

for the representation of images, we choose to use a con-
volutional neural network. id98 have been widely used in
different vision domains and are currently the state-of-the-
art in many object recognition tasks. we consider a id98
that has been pre-trained for the task of object classi   ca-
tion (chat   eld et al., 2014). we use a id98 solely to the
purpose of feature extraction, that is, no learning is done in
the id98 layers.

4.2. learning a common space for image and phrase

representations

let i be the set of training images, c the set of all phrases
used to describe i, and    the trainable parameters of the
model. by representing each image i     i with a vector
zi     rn thanks to the pre-trained id98, we de   ne a metric
between the image i and a phrase c as a bilinear operation:

3available at http://ml.nec-labs.com/senna/

f  (c, i) = ut

c v zi ,

(1)

0123456+npvpppappareance frequencies (%)0102030405060llllllllllllllllllllappareance frequencies (%)np vp np pp np onp vp np onp pp np vp np onp pp np pp np onp vp np pp np pp np onp vp np vp np onp pp np vp np pp np onp pp np onp pp np pp np pp np onp vp np vp np pp np onp np vp np onp vp np pp np vp np onp pp np o np onp pp np pp np vp np onp vp np pp np pp np pp np onp np vp np pp np onp pp np vp np pp np pp np onp o np vp np onp vp np sbar vp np onp vp np o vp np o051015cumulative distribution function0.20.30.40.50.60.7phrase-based image captioning

figure 3. schematic illustration of our phrase-based model for image descriptions.

with u = (uc1, . . . , uc|c|)     rm  |c| and v     rm  n being
the trainable parameters   . note that u t v could be a full
matrix, but a low-rank setting eases the capacity control.

4.3. phrase representations initialization

noun phrases or verb phrases are often a combination of
several words. good word vector representations can be
obtained very ef   ciently with many different recent ap-
proaches (mikolov et al., 2013b; mnih & kavukcuoglu,
2013; pennington et al., 2014; lebret & collobert, 2014).
mikolov et al. (2013a) also showed that simple vector ad-
dition can often produce meaningful results, such as king -
man + woman     queen. by leveraging the ability of these
word vector representations to compose by simple summa-
tion, representations for phrases are easily computed with
an element-wise addition.
each phrase c composed of k words wk is therefore repre-
sented by a vector xwk     rm thanks to a word representa-
tion model pre-trained on large unlabeled text corpora. a
vector representation uc for a phrase c = {w1, . . . , wk}
is then calculated by averaging its word vector representa-
tions:

4.4. training with negative sampling

each image i is described by a multitude of possible
phrases ci     c. we consider |c| classi   ers attributing
a score for each phrase. we train our model to discrim-
inate a target phrase cj from a set of negative phrases
ck     c        c, with ck (cid:54)= cj. with    = {u, v }, we
minimize the following logistic id168 with respect
to   :

   (cid:55)   (cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:16)

i   i

cj   ci

(cid:16)

log

v zi(cid:17)
(cid:16)

   ut
cj

1 + e

(cid:88)

ck   c   

+

log

1 + e+ut

ck

v zi(cid:17)(cid:17)

.

(3)

the model is trained using stochastic id119. a
new set of negative phrases c    is randomly picked from
the training set at each iteration.

5. from phrases to sentence
after identifying the l most likely constituents cj in the
image i, we propose to generate sentences out of them.
from this set, l     {1, . . . , l} phrases are used to compose
a syntactically correct description.

k(cid:88)

uc =

1
k

xwk .

(2)

k=1

5.1. sentence generation

vector representations for all phrases c     c can thus be ob-
tained to initialized the matrix u     rm  |c|. v     rm  n
is initialized randomly and trained to encode images in the
same vector space than the phrases used for their descrip-
tions.

using a statistical language framework, the likelihood of a
certain sentence is given by:

p (c1, c2, . . . , cl) =

p (cj|c1, . . . , cj   1)

(4)

l(cid:89)

j=1

va man in a helment skateboarding before an audience.man riding on edge of an oval ramp with a skate board.a man riding a skateboard up the side of a wooden ramp.a man on a skateboard is doing a trick.a man is grinding a ramp on a skateboard.ua mana wooden rampridingona skate boardis grindingwithnpvpppvp

pp

.

c

n

phrase-based image captioning

keeping this system as simple as possible and using the
second order markov property, we approximate equation 4
with a trigram language model:

p (c1, c2, . . . , cl)     l(cid:89)

p (cj|cj   2, cj   1) .

(5)

start

np

c

j=1

to

the

best

candidate

corresponds

the
sentence
p (c1, c2, . . . , cl) which maximizes the likelihood of
equation 5 over all the possible sizes of sentence. because
we want to constrain the decoding algorithm to include
prior knowledge on chunking tags t     {n p, v p, p p},
we rewrite equation 5 as:

l(cid:89)
(cid:88)
l(cid:89)

j=1

t

=

p (cj|tj = t, cj   2, cj   1)p (tj = t|cj   2, cj   1)

figure 4. the constrained language model for generating descrip-
tion given the predicted phrases for an image.

p (cj|tj, cj   2, cj   1)p (tj|cj   2, cj   1) .

(6)

j=1

both conditions p (cj|tj, cj   2, cj   1) and p (tj|cj   2, cj   1)
are probabilities estimated by counting trigrams in the
training datasets.

5.2. sentence decoding

at decoding time, we prune the graph of all possible sen-
tences made out of the top l phrases with a id125,
according to three heuristics: (i) we consider only the tran-
sitions which are likely to happen (we discard any sentence
which would have a trigram transition id203 inferior
to 0.01). this thresholding helps to discard sentences that
are semantically incorrect; (ii) each predicted phrases cj
may appear only once4; (iii) we add syntactic constraints
which are illustrated in figure 4. the last heuristic is based
on the analysis of syntax in section 3. in figure 2, we see
that a noun phrase is, in general, always followed by a verb
phrase or a prepositional phrase, and both are then followed
by another noun phrase. a large majority of the sentences
contain three noun phrases interleaved with verb phrases or
prepositional phrases. according the statistics reported in
figure 1, sentences with two or four noun phrases are also
common, but sentences with more than four noun phrases
are marginal. we thus repeat this process n = {2, 3, 4}
times until reaching the end of a sentence (characterized by
a period).

5.3. sentence re-ranking

for each test image i, the proposed model will generate a
set of m sentences. sentence generation is not conditioned
on the image, apart from phrases which are selected be-
forehand. some phrase sequences might be syntactically

4this is easy to implement with a id125, but intractable

with a full search.

good, but have low match with the image. consider, for
instance, an image with a cat and a dog. both sentences
   a cat sitting on a mat and a dog eating a bone    and    a
cat sitting on a mat    are correct, but the second is missing
an important part of the image. a ranking of the generated
sentences is therefore necessary to choose the one that has
the best match with the image.
because a generated sentence is composed from l phrases
predicted by our system, we simply average the phrase
scores given by equation 1. for a generated sentence s
composed of l phrases cj, a score between s and i is calcu-
lated as:

f  (cj, i) .

(7)

(cid:88)

cj   s

1
l

the best candidate is the sentence which has the highest
score out of the m generated sentences. this ranking helps
the system to chose the sentence which is closer to the sam-
ple image.

6. experiments
6.1. experimental setup

6.1.1. feature selection

following karpathy & fei-fei (2014), the image features
are extracted using vgg id98 (chat   eld et al., 2014). this
model generates image representations of dimension 4096
from rgb input images.
for each training set, only phrases occurring at least ten
times are considered. this threshold is chosen to ful   l two
objectives: (i) limit the number of phrases c and therefore
the size of the matrix u and (ii) exclude rare phrases to bet-
ter generalize the descriptions. statistics on the number of
phrases are reported in table 1. for flickr30k, this thresh-
old covers about 81% of np, 83% of vp and 99% of pp. for
coco, it covers about 73% of np, 75% of vp and 99%

phrase-based image captioning

noun phrase (np)
verb phrase (vp)
prepositional phrase (pp)
total |c|

flickr30k

4818
2109
128

7055

coco
8982
3083
189

12254

table 1. statistics of phrases appearing at least ten times.

of pp. phrase representations are then computed by aver-
aging vector representations of their words. we obtained
word representations from the hellinger pca of a word co-
occurrence matrix, following the method described in le-
bret & collobert (2014). the word co-occurrence matrix
is built over the entire english wikipedia5, with a symmet-
ric context window of ten words coming from the 10,000
most frequent words. words, and therefore also phrases,
are represented in 400-dimensional vectors.

6.1.2. learning the multimodal metric
the parameters    are v     r400  4096 (initialized ran-
domly) and u     r400  |c| (initialized with the phrase rep-
resentations) which are tuned on the validation datasets.
they are trained with 15 randomly chosen negative sam-
ples and a learning rate set to 0.00025.

6.1.3. generating sentences from the

predicted phrases

transition probabilities for our constrained language model
(see figure 4) are calculated independently for each train-
ing set. no smoothing has been used in the experiments.
concerning the set of top-ranked phrases for a given test
image, we select only the top    ve predicted verb phrases
and the top    ve predicted prepositional phrases. since the
average number of noun phrases is higher than for the two
other types of phrases (see figure 1), more noun phrases
are needed. the top twenty predicted noun phrases are thus
selected.

6.2. experimental results

as a    rst evaluation, we consider the task of retrieving the
ground-truth phrases from test image descriptions. results
reported in table 2 show that our system achieves a recall
of around 50% on this task on the test set of both datasets,
assuming the threshold considered for each type of phrase
(see 6.1.3). note that this task is extremely dif   cult, as se-
mantically similar phrases (the women / women / the little

5available at http://download.wikimedia.org. we

took the january 2014 version.

girls) are classi   ed separately. despite the possible number
of noun phrases being higher, results in table 2 reveal that
noun phrases are better retrieved than verb phrases. this
shows that our system is able to detect different objects in
the image. however,    nding the right verb phrase seems
to be more dif   cult. a possible explanation could be that
there exists a wide choice of verb phrases to describe in-
teractions between the noun phrases. for instance, we see
in figure 3 that two annotators have used the same noun
phrases (a man, a skateboard and a (wooden) ramp) to
describe the scene, but they have then chosen a different
verb phrase to link them (riding versus is grinding). there-
fore, we suspect that a low recall for verb phrases does not
necessarily mean that the predictions are wrong. finding
the right prepositional phrase seems, on the contrary, much
easier. the high recall for prepositional phrase can be ex-
plained by much lower variability of this type of phrase
compared to the two others (see table 1).

noun phrase (np)
verb phrase (vp)
prepostional phrase (pp)

total

flickr30k

38.14
20.61
81.70

44.92

coco
45.44
27.83
84.49

52.49

table 2. recall on phrase retrieval. for each test image, we take
the top 20 predicted np, the top 5 predicted vp, and the top 5
predicted pp.

as a second evaluation, we consider the task of generat-
ing full descriptions. we measure the quality of the gener-
ated sentences using the popular, yet controversial, id7
score (papineni et al., 2002). table 3 shows our sentence
generation results on the two datasets considered. id7
scores are reported up to 4-gram. human agreement scores
are computed by comparing the    rst ground-truth descrip-
tion against the four others6. for comparison, we include
results from recently proposed models. our model, despite
being simpler, achieves similar results to state of the art re-
sults. it is interesting to note that our results are very close
to the human agreement scores.
we show examples of full automatic generated sentences in
figure 5. the simple language model used is able to gener-
ate sentences that are in general syntactically correct. our
model produces sensible descriptions with variable com-
plexity for different test samples. due to the generative as-
pect of the model, it can occur that the sentence generated is
very different from the ground-truth and still provides a de-

6for all models, id7 scores are computed against    ve refer-
ence sentences which give a slight advantage compared to human
scores.

phrase-based image captioning

flickr30k

coco

b-1

b-2

b-3

b-4

b-1

b-2

b-3

b-4

0.55

0.35

0.23

0.15

0.68

0.45

0.30

0.20

0.55

0.50

0.66

0.59

-

0.24

0.30

-

0.19

0.15

-

-
-
-

0.39

0.25

0.16

-

-

-

-

0.57

0.67

0.63

-

-

-

0.37

0.19

-

-

0.44

0.30

-

-

0.59

0.35

0.20

0.12

0.70

0.46

0.30

-
-
-

0.21

0.21

0.20

human agreement

mao et al. (2014)
karpathy & fei-fei (2014)
vinyals et al. (2014)
donahue et al. (2014)
fang et al. (2014)
our model

table 3. comparison between human agreement scores, state of the art models and our model on both datasets. note that there are slight
variations between the test sets chosen in each paper.

phrases

nearest neighbors

scent description. the last row of figure 5 illustrates failure
samples. we can see in these failure samples that our sys-
tem has however outputted relevant phrases. there is still
room for improvement for generating the    nal description.
we deliberately choose a simple language model to show
that competitive results can be achieved with a simple ap-
proach. a more complex language model could probably
avoid these failure samples by considering a larger context.
the id203 for a dog to stand on top of a wave is obvi-
ously very low, but this kind of mistake cannot be detected
with a simple trigram language model.

a grey cat

home plate

6.3. diversity of image descriptions

a half pipe

#

1
2
3
4
10

1
4
6
9
10

1
2
5
9
10

before

after

a grey dog

a gray cat

a grey and black cat

a grey and black cat

a gray cat

a grey elephant

a yellow cat

a brown cat

a grey and white cat
grey and white cat

a home plate

a plate

another plate

a red plate

a dinner plate

a pipe
a half

a small clock
a large clock
a small plate

a home plate

home base
the pitch
the batter

a baseball pitch

a pipe

the ramp

a hand rail

a skate board ramp

an empty pool

in contrast to id56-based models, our model is not trained
to match a given image i with its ground-truth descrip-
tions s, i.e., to give p (s|i). because our model outputs
instead a set of phrases, this is not really surprising that
only 1% of our generated descriptions are in the training set
for flickr30k, and 9.7% for coco. while a id56-based
model is generative, it might easily over   t a small train-
ing data. vinyals et al. (2014) report, for instance, that the
generated sentence is present in the training set 80% of the
time. our model therefore offers a good alternative with the
possibility of producing unseen descriptions with a combi-
nation of phrases from the training set.

6.4. phrase representation fine-tuning

before training the model, the matrix u is initialized with
phrase representations obtained from the whole english
wikipedia. this corpus of unlabeled text is well structured
and large enough to provide good word vector representa-
tions, which can then produce good phrase representations.
however, the content of wikipedia is clearly different from
the content of the image descriptions. some words used
for describing images might be used in different contexts

table 4. examples of three noun phrases from the coco dataset
with    ve of their nearest neighbors before and after learning.

in wikipedia, which can lead to out-of-domain represen-
tations for certain phrases. this becomes thus crucial to
adapt these phrase representations by    ne-tuning the matrix
u during the training7. some examples of noun phrases are
reported in table 4 with their nearest neighbors before and
after the training. these con   rm the importance of    ne-
in wikipedia, cat
tuning to incorporate visual features.
seems to occur in the same context than dog or other an-
imals. when looking at the nearest neighbors of a phrase
such as a grey cat, other grey animals arise. after train-
ing on images, the word cat becomes the important feature
of that phrase. and we see that the nearest neighbors are
now cats with different colours. in some cases, averaging

7experiments with a    xed u phrase representations matrix
signi   cantly hurt the general performance. we observe about
a 50% decrease in both datasets with the id7 metric. since
the number of trainable parameters is reduced, the capacity of v
should be increased to guarantee a fair comparison.

phrase-based image captioning

figure 5. quantitative results for images on the coco dataset. ground-truth annotation (in blue), the np, vp and pp predicted from the
model and generated annotation (in black) are shown for each image. the last row are failure samples.

word vectors to represent phrases is not enough to capture
the semantic meaning. fine-tuning is thus also important
to better learn speci   c phrases. images related to baseball
games, for example, have enabled the phrase home plate to
be better de   ned. this is also true for the phrase a half pipe
with images about skateboarding. this leads to interesting
phrase representations, grounded in the visual world, which
could be possibly used in natural language applications in
future work.

7. conclusion
in this paper, we propose a simple model that is able to in-
fer different phrases from image samples. from the phrases
predicted, our model is able to automatically generate sen-
tences using a statistical language model. we show that the
problem of sentence generation can be effectively achieved
without the use of complex recurrent networks. our algo-
rithm, despite being simpler than state-of-the-art models,
achieves similar results on this task. also, our model gener-
ate new sentences which are not generally present in train-
ing set. future research directions will go towards leverag-
ing unsupervised data and more complex language models

a man riding skis on a snow covered ski slope. np: a man, skis, the snow, a person, a woman, a snow covered slope,  a slope, a snowboard, a skier, man. vp: wearing, riding, holding, standing on, skiing down. pp: on, in, of, with, down. a man wearing skis on the snow.a man is doing skateboard tricks on a ramp. np: a skateboard, a man, a trick, his skateboard, the air, a skateboarder, a ramp, a skate board, a person, a woman. vp: doing, riding, is doing, performing,    ying through. pp: on, of, in, at, with. a man riding a skateboard on a ramp.the girl with blue hair stands under the umbrella. np: a woman, an umbrella, a man, a person, a girl, umbrellas, that, a little girl, a cell phone. vp: holding, wearing, is holding, holds, carrying. pp: with, on, of, in, under. a woman is holding an umbrella.a slice of pizza sitting on top of a white plate. np:  a plate, a white plate, a table, pizza, it, a pizza, food, a sandwich, top, a close. vp: topped with, has, is, sitting on, is on. pp: of, on, with, in, up. a table with a plate of pizza on a white plate.a person on a surf board in the ocean. np: a dog, a wave, a person, the water, a man, the ocean, top, that, the snow, a surfboard. vp: riding, standing on, wearing, laying on, sitting on. pp: on, of, in, with, near. a dog standing on top of a wave on the ocean.a cat sitting in a chair staring at a plate on a table. np: a table, top, a desk, a cat, front, it, that, a laptop, a laptop computer, the table. vp: sitting on, is, sitting in, sitting next to, has. pp: of, on, with, in, next to. a cat sitting on top of a desk with a laptop.people gather around a truck parked on a boat. np:a man, a bench, a boat, a woman, a person, luggage, that, a train, water, the water. vp: sitting on, carrying, riding, sitting in, sits on. pp: of, on, with, in, next to. a man sitting on a bench with a woman carrying luggage.a baseball player swinging a bat on a    eld. np:  the ball, a game, a baseball player, a man, a tennis court, a ball, home plate, a baseball game, a batter, a    eld. vp: swinging, to hit, playing, holding, is swinging. pp: on, during, in, at, of. a baseball player swinging a bat on a baseball    eld.a bunch of kites    ying in the sky on the beach. np:  the beach, a beach, a kite, kites, the ocean, the water, the sky, people, a sandy beach, a group. vp:    ying,    ies, is    ying,    ying in, are. pp: on, of, with, in, at. people    ying kites on the beach.phrase-based image captioning

to improve sentence generation. another interest is assess-
ing the impact of visually grounded phrase representations
into existing natural language processing systems.

lecun, y., bottou, l., bengio, y., and haffner, p. gradient-
based learning applied to document recognition. pro-
ceedings of the ieee, 1998.

acknowledgements
this work was supported by the hasler foundation
through the grant    information and communication tech-
nology for a better world 2020    (smartworld).

references
chat   eld, k., simonyan, k., vedaldi, a., and zisserman,
a. return of the devil in the details: delving deep into
convolutional nets. in british machine vision confer-
ence, 2014.

chen, x. and zitnick, c. l. learning a recurrent visual
representation for image id134. corr,
abs/1411.5654, 2014.

donahue, j., hendricks, l. a., guadarrama, s., rohrbach,
m., venugopalan, s., saenko, k., and darrell, t.
long-term recurrent convolutional networks for visual
recognition and description. corr, abs/1411.4389,
2014.

fang, h., gupta, s., iandola, f. n., srivastava, r., deng,
l., doll  ar, p., gao, j., he, x., mitchell, m., platt, j. c.,
zitnick, c. l., and zweig, g. from captions to visual
concepts and back. corr, abs/1411.4952, 2014.

hodosh, m., young, p., and hockenmaier, j. framing
image description as a ranking task: data, models and
id74. journal of arti   cial intelligence re-
search, 2013.

karpathy, a. and fei-fei, l. deep visual-semantic
alignments for generating image descriptions. corr,
abs/1412.2306, 2014.

kiros, r., salakhutdinov, r., and zemel, r. s. unifying
visual-semantic embeddings with multimodal neural
language models. volume abs/1411.2539, 2014.

kulkarni, g., premraj, v., dhar, s., li, siming, choi, yejin,
berg, a. c., and berg, t. l. baby talk: understanding
and generating simple image descriptions. in cvpr,
2011.

kuznetsova, p., ordonez, v., berg, a. c., berg, t. l., and
choi, y. collective generation of natural image descrip-
tions. in acl, 2012.

lebret, r. and collobert, r. rehabilitation of count-
based models for word vector representations. corr,
abs/1412.4930, 2014.

lin, t.-y., maire, m., belongie, s., hays, j., perona, p.,
ramanan, d., doll  ar, p., and zitnick, c. l. microsoft
coco: common objects in context. in eccv, 2014.

mao, j., xu, w., yang, y., wang, j., and yuille, a. l.
explain images with multimodal recurrent neural net-
works. corr, abs/1410.1090, 2014.

mikolov, t., chen, k., corrado, g., and dean, j. ef   cient
estimation of word representations in vector space.
iclr workshp, 2013a.

mikolov, t., sutskever, i., chen, k., corrado, g., and
dean, j. distributed representations of words and
phrases and their compositionality. in nips. 2013b.

mitchell, m., han, x., dodge, j., mensch, a., goyal,
a., berg, a., yamaguchi, k., berg, t., stratos, k., and
daum  e, iii, h. midge: generating image descriptions
from id161 detections. in eacl, 2012.

mnih, a. and kavukcuoglu, koray. learning word em-
beddings ef   ciently with noise-contrastive estimation. in
nips. 2013.

papineni, k., roukos, s., ward, t., and zhu, w.-j. id7:
a method for automatic evaluation of machine trans-
lation. in acl, 2002.

pennington, j., socher, r., and manning, c. d. glove:
in emnlp,

global vectors for word representation.
2014.

socher, r., karpathy, a., le, q. v., manning, c. d., and
ng, a. y. grounded id152 for find-
ing and describing images with sentences. tacl, 2014.

srivastava, n. and salakhutdinov, r. multimodal learning
with deep id82s. journal of machine
learning research, 2014.

venugopalan, s., xu, h., donahue, j., rohrbach, m.,
mooney, r. j., and saenko, k. translating videos to
natural language using deep recurrent neural net-
works. corr, abs/1412.4729, 2014.

vinyals, o., toshev, a., bengio, s., and erhan, d. show
and tell: a neural image caption generator. corr,
abs/1411.4555, 2014.

yao, b. z., yang, x., lin, l., lee, m. w., and zhu, s. c.
i2t: image parsing to text description. proceedings of
the ieee, 2010.

