a fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic

language models

andriy mnih
gatsby computational neuroscience unit, university college london

yee whye teh
gatsby computational neuroscience unit, university college london

amnih@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

ywteh@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

abstract

1. introduction

in spite of their superior performance, neural
probabilistic language models (nplms) re-
main far less widely used than id165 mod-
els due to their notoriously long training
times, which are measured in weeks even for
moderately-sized datasets. training nplms
is computationally expensive because they
are explicitly normalized, which leads to hav-
ing to consider all words in the vocabulary
when computing the log-likelihood gradients.

we propose a fast and simple algorithm for
training nplms based on noise-contrastive
estimation, a newly introduced procedure for
estimating unnormalized continuous distri-
butions. we investigate the behaviour of the
algorithm on the id32 corpus and
show that it reduces the training times by
more than an order of magnitude without af-
fecting the quality of the resulting models.
the algorithm is also more e   cient and much
more stable than importance sampling be-
cause it requires far fewer noise samples to
perform well.

we demonstrate the scalability of the pro-
posed approach by training several neural
language models on a 47m-word corpus with
a 80k-word vocabulary, obtaining state-of-
the-art results on the microsoft research
sentence completion challenge dataset.

appearing in proceedings of the 29 th international confer-
ence on machine learning, edinburgh, scotland, uk, 2012.
copyright 2012 by the author(s)/owner(s).

by assigning probabilities to sentences, language mod-
els allow distinguishing between probable and improb-
able sentences, which makes such models an impor-
tant component of id103, machine trans-
lation, and information retrieval systems. probabilis-
tic language models are typically based on the markov
assumption, which means that they model the condi-
tional distribution of the next word in a sentence given
some    xed number of words that immediately precede
it. the group of words conditioned on is called the
context, denoted h, while the word being predicted is
called the target word, denoted w. id165 models,
which are e   ectively smoothed tables of normalized
word/context co-occurrence counts, have dominated
language modelling for decades due to their simplicity
and excellent performance.

in the last few years neural language models have be-
come competitive with id165s and now routinely out-
perform them (mikolov et al., 2011). nplms model
the distribution for the next word as a smooth function
of learned multi-dimensional real-valued representa-
tions of the context words and the target word. similar
representations are learned for words that are used in
similar ways, ensuring that the network outputs simi-
lar id203 values for them. word representations
learned by language models are also used for natu-
ral language processing applications such as semantic
role labelling (collobert & weston, 2008), sentiment
analysis (maas & ng, 2010), id39
(turian et al., 2010), and parsing (socher et al., 2011).

unfortunately, nplms are very slow to train, which
makes them unappealing for large-scale applications.
this is a consequence of having to consider the entire
vocabulary when computing the id203 of a single
word or the corresponding gradient. in fact, the time
complexity of this computation scales as the product

a fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic language models

of the vocabulary size and the word feature dimen-
sionality. one way to accelerate this computation is
to reduce the vocabulary size for the nplm by using it
to predict only the most frequent words and handling
the rest using an id165 model (schwenk & gauvain,
2005).

alternatively, the vocabulary can be structured into a
tree with words at the leaves, allowing exponentially
faster computation of word probabilities and their gra-
dients (morin & bengio, 2005). unfortunately, the
predictive performance of the resulting model is heav-
ily dependent on the tree used and    nding a good tree
is a di   cult problem (mnih & hinton, 2009).

perhaps a more elegant approach is to keep the model
the same and to approximate the expensive gradient
computations using importance sampling (bengio &
sen  ecal, 2003). unfortunately, the variance in the im-
portance sampling estimates can make learning unsta-
ble, unless it is carefully controlled (bengio & sen  ecal,
2008).

in this paper we propose an e   cient algorithm for
training nplms based on noise-contrastive estima-
tion (gutmann & hyv  arinen, 2010), which is much
more stable than importance sampling. though it also
uses sampling to approximate the gradients needed
for learning, neither the number of samples nor the
proposal distribution require dynamic adaptation for
achieving performance on par with maximum likeli-
hood learning.

2. neural probabilistic language models

they use: neural language models learn their features
jointly with other parameters, while maximum id178
models use    xed hand-engineered features and only
learn the weights for those features. a neural language
model represents each word in the vocabulary using a
real-valued feature vector and de   nes the scoring func-
tion in terms of the feature vectors of the context words
and the next word. in some models, di   erent feature
vector tables are used for the context and the next
word vocabularies (bengio et al., 2000), while in oth-
ers the table is shared (bengio et al., 2003; mnih &
hinton, 2007).

the feature vectors account for the vast majority of pa-
rameters in neural language models, which means that
their memory requirements are linear in the vocabu-
lary size. this compares favourably to the memory re-
quirements of the id165 models, which are typically
linear in the training set size.

2.1. log-bilinear model

the training method we propose is directly applicable
to all neural probabilistic and maximum-id178 lan-
guage models. for simplicity, we will perform our ex-
periments using the log-bilinear language (lbl) model
(mnih & hinton, 2007), which is the simplest neu-
ral language model. the lbl model performs lin-
ear prediction in the semantic word feature space and
does not have non-linearities. in spite of its simplic-
ity, the lbl model has been shown to outperform
id165s, though the more complex neural language
models (mikolov et al., 2010; mnih et al., 2009) can
outperform it.

a statistical language model is simply a collection of
conditional distributions for the next word, indexed
by its context.1 in a neural language model the condi-
tional distribution corresponding to context h, p h(w),
is de   ned as

(cid:80)

p h

   (w) =

exp(s  (w, h))
w(cid:48) exp(s  (w(cid:48), h))

,

(1)

where s  (w, h) is the scoring function with parameters
   which quanti   es the compatibility of word w with
context h. the negated scoring function is sometimes
referred to as the energy function (bengio et al., 2000).

depending on the form of s  (w, h), eq. 1 can de-
scribe both neural and maximum id178 language
models (berger et al., 1996). the main di   erence
between these two model classes lies in the features

1though almost all statistical language models predict
the next word, it is also possible to model the distribution
of the word preceding the context or surrounded by the
context.

in this paper we will use a slightly extended version of
the lbl model that uses separate feature vector tables
for the context words and the target words. thus a
context word w will be represented with feature vector
rw, while a target word w will be represented with fea-
ture vector qw. given a context h, the model computes
the predicted representation for the target word by
linearly combining the feature vectors for the context
words using position-dependent context weight matri-
ces ci:

  q =

cirwi.

(2)

i=1

the score for the match between the context and the
next word is computed by taking the dot product be-
tween the predicted representation and the represen-
tation of the candidate target word w:
s  (w, h) =   q(cid:62)qw + bw.

(3)

n   1(cid:88)

a fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic language models

here bw is the base rate parameter used to model the
popularity of w. the id203 of w in context h
is then obtained by plugging the above score function
into eq. 1.

2.2. maximum likelihood learning

maximum likelihood training of neural language mod-
els is tractable but expensive because computing the
gradient of
log-likelihood takes time linear in the
vocabulary size. the contribution of a single con-
text/word observation to the gradient of the log-
likelihood is given by

s  (w, h)    (cid:88)

w(cid:48)

   (w(cid:48))
p h

   
     

s  (w(cid:48), h)

(cid:21)

(4)

(cid:20)    

     

=

   
     

s  (w, h)     ep h

  

s  (w, h)

.

   
     

log p h

   (w) =

   
     

   (w(cid:48)) is expensive to evaluate
the expectation w.r.t. p h
because it requires computing s  (w, h) for all words
in the vocabulary. since vocabularies typically con-
tain tens of thousands of words, maximum likelihood
learning tends to be very slow.

2.3. importance sampling

bengio and sen  ecal (2003) have proposed a method
for speeding up training of neural language models
based on approximating the expectation in eq. 4 us-
ing importance sampling. the idea is to generate k
samples x1, ..., xk from an easy-to-sample-from distri-
bution qh(w) and estimate the gradient with

   
     

log p h

   (w)        
     

s  (w, h)     1
v

k(cid:88)
and v = (cid:80)k

j=1

v(xj)

   
     

s  (xj, h),

(5)

where v(x) = exp(s  (x,h))
j=1 v(xj). the
qh(w=x)
id172 by v is necessary here because the im-
portance weights v are computed using the unnormal-
ized model distribution exp(s  (x, h)). typically the
proposal distribution is an id165 model    t to the
training set, possibly with a context size di   erent from
the neural model   s.

though this approach is conceptually simple, it is non-
trivial to use in practice because the high variance of
the importance sampling estimates can make learn-
ing unstable. the variance tends to grow as learn-
ing progresses, because the model distribution moves
away from the proposal distribution.2 one way to

2bengio and sen  ecal (2008) argue that this happens be-

control the variance is to keep increasing the number
of samples during training so that the e   ective sam-
ple size stays above some predetermined value (ben-
gio & sen  ecal, 2003). alternatively, the id165 pro-
posal distribution can be adapted to track the model
distribution throughout training (bengio & sen  ecal,
2008). the    rst approach is simpler but less e   -
cient because the increasing number of samples makes
learning slower. the second approach leads to greater
speedups but is considerably more di   cult to imple-
ment and requires additional memory for storing the
adaptive proposal distribution.

3. noise-contrastive estimation

we propose using noise-contrastive estimation (nce)
as a more stable alternative to importance sampling for
e   cient training of neural language models and other
models de   ned by eq. 1. nce has recently been in-
troduced by gutmann and hyv  arinen (2010) for train-
ing unnormalized probabilistic models. though it has
been developed for estimating id203 densities, we
are interested in applying it to discrete distributions
and so will assume discrete distributions and use prob-
ability mass functions instead of density functions.

the basic idea of nce is to reduce the problem of
density estimation to that of binary classi   cation, dis-
criminating between samples from the data distribu-
tion and samples from a known noise distribution. in
the language modelling setting, the data distribution
p h
d (w) will be the distribution of words that occur af-
ter a particular context h. though it is possible to use
context-dependent noise distributions, for simplicity
we will use a context-independent (unigram) pn(w).
we are interested in    tting the context-dependent
model p h

   (w) to p h

d (w).

following gutmann and hyv  arinen (2012), we assume
that noise samples are k times more frequent than data
samples, so that datapoints come from the mixture
k+1 p h
k+1 pn(w). then the posterior id203
that sample w came from the data distribution is

d (w)+ k

1

p h(d = 1|w) =

p h

d (w)

p h

d (w) + kpn(w)

.

(6)

since we would like to    t p h
place of p h
a function of the model parameters   :

   in
d in eq. 6, making the posterior id203

d , we use p h

   to p h

p h(d = 1|w,   ) =

p h

   (w)

p h

   (w) + kpn(w)

.

(7)

cause neural language models and id165 models learn
very di   erent distributions.

a fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic language models

(cid:21)
(cid:21)

(cid:20)
(cid:20)

this quantity can be too expensive to compute, how-
ever, because of the id172 required for eval-
uating p h
   (w) (eq. 1). nce sidesteps this issue by
avoiding explicit id172 and treating normal-
ization constants as parameters. thus the model is
parameterized in terms of an unnormalized distribu-
tion p h0
  0 and a learned parameter ch corresponding to
the logarithm of the normalizing constant:

p h
   (w) = p h0

  0 (w) exp(ch).

(8)

here   0 are the parameters of the unnormalized dis-
tribution and    = {  0, ch}.
to    t the context-dependent model to the data (for
the moment ignoring the fact that it shares parameters
with models for other contexts), we simply maximize
the expectation of log p h(d|w,   ) under the mixture of
the data and noise samples. this leads to the objective
function

j h(  ) =ep h

d

log

kepn

log

p h

   (w)

p h

   (w) + kpn(w)

kpn(w)

p h

   (w) + kpn(w)

d

(cid:20)
(cid:20)
(cid:88)

w

with the gradient

   
     

j h(  ) =ep h

kpn(w)

p h

   (w) + kpn(w)

log p h

   (w)

kepn

p h

   (w)

p h

   (w) + kpn(w)

log p h

   (w)

note that the gradient can also be expressed as

   
     

   
     

  

   
     

j h(  ) =

kpn(w)

p h
   (w) + kpn(w)
d (w)     p h

   (w))

(p h

and that as k        ,

j h(  )    (cid:88)

(p h

   
     

w

d (w)     p h

   (w))

   
     

log p h

   (w), (12)

which is the maximum likelihood gradient. thus as
the ratio of noise samples to observations increases,
the nce gradient approaches the maximum likelihood
gradient.

in practice, given a word w observed in context h, we
compute its contribution to the gradient by generating
k noise samples x1, ..., xk and using the formula

   
     

j h,w(  ) =

kpn(w)

(cid:20)

p h

k(cid:88)

   (w) + kpn(w)
   (xi)

p h

   
     

p h

   (xi) + kpn(xi)

i=1

log p h

   (w)    (13)
(cid:21)

log p h

   (xi)

.

   
     

p h

   (xi)

   (xi)+kpn(xi) are always be-
note that the weights
p h
tween 0 and 1, which makes nce-based learning very
stable (gutmann & hyv  arinen, 2010). in contrast, the
weights produced by importance sampling can be ar-
bitrarily large.

since the distributions for di   erent contexts share pa-
rameters, we cannot learn these distributions indepen-
dently of each other by optimizing one j h(  ) at a time.
instead, we de   ne a global nce objective by combin-
ing the per-context nce objectives using the empirical
context probabilities p (h) as weights:

j(  ) =

p (h)j h(  ).

(14)

h

note that this is the traditional approach for combin-
ing the per-context ml objectives for training neural
language models.

(cid:88)

+

(9)

3.1. dealing with normalizing constants

(cid:21)
(cid:21)

   

(10)

.

(11)

our initial implementation of nce training learned a
(log-)normalizing constant (c in eq. 8) for each con-
text in the training set, storing them in a hash table
indexed by the context.3 though this approach works
well for small datasets, it requires estimating one pa-
rameter per context, making it di   cult to scale to huge
numbers of observed contexts encountered by models
with large context sizes. surprisingly, we discovered
that    xing the normalizing constants to 1,4 instead of
learning them, did not a   ect the performance of the
resulting models. we believe this is because the model
has so many free parameters that meeting the approxi-
mate per-context id172 constraint encouraged
by the objective function is easy.

   
     

log p h

   (w),

3.2. potential speedup

we will now compare the gradient computation costs
for nce and ml learning. suppose c is the context
size, d is the word feature vector dimensionality, and
v is the vocabulary size of the model. then com-
puting the predicted representation using eq. 2 takes
about cd2 operations for both nce and ml. for ml,
computing the distribution of the next word from the
predicted representation takes about v d operations.
for nce, evaluating the id203 of k noise samples
under the model takes about kd operations. since the
gradient computation in each model has the same com-
plexity as computing the probabilities, the speedup for

3we did not use the learned normalizing constants when
computing the validation and test set perplexities. rather
we normalized the probabilities explicitly.

4this amounts to setting the normalizing parameters c

to 0.

a fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic language models

table 1. results for the lbl model with 100d feature vec-
tors and a 2-word context on the id32 corpus.

training

number of test training

algorithm

samples

ppl

time (h)

ml
nce
nce
nce
nce

163.5
192.5
172.6
163.1
159.1

1
5
25
100

21
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5

table 2. the e   ect of the noise distribution and the num-
ber of noise samples on the test set perplexity.

number of

ppl using

ppl using

samples

unigram noise

uniform noise

1
5
25
100

192.5
172.6
163.1
159.1

291.0
233.7
195.1
173.2

each parameter update due to using nce is about

speedup =

cd2 + v d
cd2 + kd

=

cd + v
cd + k

.

(15)

for a model with a 2-word context, 100d feature vec-
tors, and a vocabulary size of 10k, an nce update
using 25 noise samples should be about 45 times faster
than an ml update.

since the time complexity of computing the predicted
representation is quadratic in the feature vector di-
mensionality, it can dominate the cost of the parameter
update, making learning slow even for a small number
of noise samples. we can avoid this by making context
weight matrices ci diagonal, reducing the complexity
of computing the predicted representation to cd, and
making the speedup factor c+v
c+k . for the model above
this would amount to a factor of 370. the use of di-
agonal context matrices was introduced by mnih &
hinton (2009) to speed up their hierarchical lbl-like
model.

since the cost of a parameter update for importance-
sampling-based learning is the same as for nce with
the same number of noise samples, the algorithm that
needs fewer samples to perform well will be faster.

4. id32 results

we investigated the properties of the proposed algo-
rithm empirically on the id32 corpus. as is
common practice, we trained on sections 0-20 (930k

words) and used sections 21-22 (74k words) as the val-
idation set and sections 23-24 (82k words) as the test
set. the standard vocabulary of 10k most frequent
words was used with the remaining words replaced by
a special token. we chose to use this dataset to keep
the training time for exact maximum likelihood learn-
ing reasonable.

the learning rates were adapted at the end of each
epoch based on the change in the validation set per-
plexity since the end of the previous epoch. the rates
were halved when the perplexity increased and were
left unchanged otherwise. parameters were updated
based on mini-batches of 1000 context/word pairs
each. except when stated otherwise, nce training
generated 25 noise samples from the empirical unigram
distribution per context/word observation. noise sam-
ples were generated anew for each update. we did
not use a weight penalty as the validation-score-based
learning rate reduction appeared to be su   cient to
avoid over   tting. all models used a two-word context
and di   erent 100d feature vector tables for context
and target words.

our    rst experiment compared ml learning to nce
learning for various numbers of noise samples. the re-
sulting test perplexities and training times are shown
in table 1.
it is clear that increasing the number
of noise samples produces better-performing models,
with 25 samples being su   cient to match the ml-
trained model.
in terms of training time, nce was
14 times faster than ml. the number of noise sam-
ples did not have a signi   cant e   ect on the running
time because computing the predicted representation
was considerably more expensive than computing the
id203 of (at most) 100 samples. the main rea-
son the speedup factor was less than 45 (the value pre-
dicted in section 3.2) is because nce took about twice
as many epochs as ml to converge. our nce imple-
mentation is also less optimized than the ml imple-
mentation which takes greater advantage of the blas
matrix routines.

to explore the e   ect of the noise distribution on the
performance of the algorithm, we tried generating
noise samples from the unigram as well as the uniform
distribution. for each noise distribution we trained
models using 1, 5, 25, and 100 noise samples per dat-
apoint. as shown in table 2, the unigram noise dis-
tribution leads to much better test set perplexity in
all cases. however, the perplexity gap shrinks as the
number of noise samples increases, from almost 100
for a single noise sample down to under 15 for 100
noise samples. in spite of poor test set performance,
a uniform noise distribution did not lead to learning

a fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic language models

instability even when a single noise sample was used.

in addition to the ml and nce algorithms, we also
implemented the importance sampling training algo-
rithm from (bengio & sen  ecal, 2003) to use as a base-
line, but found it very unstable. it diverged in virtually
all of our experiments, even with adaptive sample size
and the target e   ective sample size set to hundreds.
the only run that did not diverge involved learning a
unigram model using the target unigram as the pro-
posal distribution, which is the ideal situation for im-
portance sampling. the cause of failure in all cases was
the appearance of extremely large importance weights
once the model distribution became su   ciently di   er-
ent from the unigram proposal distribution5, which is
a known problem with importance sampling. since
is-based methods seem to require well over a hundred
samples per gradient computation (bengio & sen  ecal,
2008), even when an adaptive proposal distribution
is used, we expect is-based training to be consider-
ably slower than nce, which, as we have shown, can
achieve ml-level performance with only 25 noise sam-
ples.

5. sentence completion challenge

to demonstrate the scalability and e   ectiveness of
our approach we used it to train several large neu-
ral language models for the microsoft research sen-
tence completion challenge (zweig & burges, 2011).
the challenge was designed as a benchmark for seman-
tic models and consists of sat-style sentence comple-
tion problems. given 1,040 sentences, each of which is
missing a word, the task is to select the correct word
out of the    ve candidates provided for each sentence.
candidate words have been chosen from relatively in-
frequent words using a maximum id178 model to
ensure that the resulting complete sentences were not
too improbable. human judges then picked the best
four candidates for each sentence so that all comple-
tions were grammatically correct but the correct an-
swer was unambiguous. though humans can achieve
over 90% accuracy on the task, statistical models fare
much worse with the best result of 49% produced
by a whole-sentence lsa model, and id165 models
achieving only about 39% accuracy (zweig & burges,
2011).

neural language models are a natural choice for this
task because they can take advantage of larger con-
texts than traditional id165 models, which we expect

5though using a unigram proposal distribution might
appear naive, bengio and sen  ecal (2003) reported that
higher-order id165 proposal distributions worked much
worse than the unigram.

to be important for sentence completion. we used a
slightly modi   ed lbl architecture for our models for
this task. in the interests of scalability, we used diag-
onal context weight matrices which reduced the time
complexity of gradient computations from quadratic
to linear in the dimensionality of word feature vectors
and allowed us to use more feature dimensions. since
the task was sentence completion, we made the mod-
els aware of sentence boundaries by using a special
   out-of-sentence    token for words in context positions
outside of the sentence containing the word being pre-
dicted. for example, this token would be used as the
context word when predicting the    rst word in a sen-
tence using a model with a single-word context.

we score a candidate sentence with a language model
by using it to compute the id203 of each word in
the sentence and taking the product of those probabil-
ities as the sentence score. we then pick the candidate
word that produces the highest-scoring sentence as our
answer. note that this way of using a model with a c-
word context takes into account c words on both sides
of the candidate word because the probabilities of the
c words following the candidate word depend on it.

the models were trained on the standard training set
for the challenge containing 522 works from project
gutenberg. after removing the project gutenberg
headers and footers from the    les, we split them into
sentences and then tokenized the sentences into words.
we used the punkt sentence tokenizer and the penn
treebank word tokenizer from nltk (bird et al.,
2009). we then converted all words to lowercase and
replaced the ones that occurred fewer than 5 times
with an    unknown word    token, resulting in a vocab-
ulary size of just under 80,000. the sentences to be
completed were preprocessed in the same manner. the
resulting dataset was then randomly split at the sen-
tence level into a test and validation sets of 10k words
(500 sentences) each and a 47m-word training set.

we used the training procedure described in section 4,
with the exception of using a small weight penalty to
avoid over   tting. each model took between one and
two days to train on a single core of a modern cpu. as
a baseline for comparison, we also trained several n-
gram models (with modi   ed kneser-ney smoothing)
using the srilm toolkit (stolcke, 2002), obtaining
results similar to those reported by zweig & burges
(2011).

since we selected hyperparameters based on the
(gutenberg) validation set perplexity, we report the
scores on the entire collection of 1,040 sentences, which
means that our results are directly comparable to those
of zweig & burges (2011). as can be seen from ta-

a fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic language models

table 3. accuracy on the complete msr sentence com-
pletion challenge dataset. n    2 indicates a bidirectional
context. the lsa result is from (zweig & burges, 2011).

model

context latent percent test

type

size

dim

correct

ppl

3-gram
4-gram
5-gram
6-gram

lsa
lbl
lbl
lbl
lbl
lbl
lbl
lbl
lbl
lbl

2
3
4
5
sentence
2
3
5
10
5
10
10
10  2
10  2

300
100
100
100
100
200
200
300
100
200

36.0
39.1
38.7
38.4
49
41.5
45.1
49.3
50.0
50.8
52.8
54.7
44.5
49.8

130.8
122.1
121.5
121.7

145.5
135.6
129.8
124.0
123.6
117.7
116.4
38.6
33.6

ble 3, more word features and larger context leads to
better performance in lbl models in terms of both ac-
curacy and perplexity. the lbl models perform con-
siderably better on sentence completion than id165
models, in spite of having higher test perplexity. even
the lbl model with a two-word context performs bet-
ter than any id165 model. the lbl model with a
   ve-word context, matches the best published result
on the dataset. note that the lsa model that pro-
duced that result considered all words in a sentence,
while an lbl model with a c-word contexts considers
only the 2c words that surround the candidate word.
the model with a 10-word context and 300d feature
vectors outperforms the lsa model by a large mar-
gin and sets a new accuracy record for the dataset at
54.7%.

language models typically use the words preceding
the word of interest as the context. however, since
we are interested in    lling in a word in the middle of
the sentence, it makes sense to use both the preceding
and the following words as the context for the lan-
guage model, making the context bidirectional. we
trained several lbl models with bidirectional con-
text to see whether such models are superior to their
unidirectional-context counterparts for sentence com-
pletion. scoring a sentence with a bidirectional model
is both simpler and faster: we simply compute the
id203 of the candidate word under the model us-
ing the context surrounding the word. thus a model
is applied only once per sentence, instead of c+1 times
required by the unidirectional models.

as table 3 shows, the lbl models with bidirectional

contexts achieve much lower test perplexity than their
unidirectional counterparts, which is not surprising be-
cause they also condition on words that follow the
word being predicted. what is surprising, however,
is that bidirectional contexts appear to be consider-
ably less e   ective for sentence completion than unidi-
rectional contexts. though the c-word context model
and c    2-word context model look at the same words
when using the scoring procedures we described above,
the unidirectional model seems to make better use of
the available information.

6. discussion

we have introduced a simple and e   cient method for
training statistical language models based on noise-
contrastive estimation. our results show that the
learning algorithm is very stable and can produce mod-
els that perform as well as the ones trained using maxi-
mum likelihood in less than one-tenth of the time. in a
large-scale test of the approach, we trained several neu-
ral language models on a collection of project guten-
berg texts, achieving state-of-the-art performance on
the microsoft research sentence completion chal-
lenge dataset.

though we have shown that the unigram noise distri-
bution is su   cient for training neural language models
e   ciently, context-dependent noise distributions are
worth investigating because they might lead to even
faster training by reducing the number of noise sam-
ples needed.

recently, pihlaja et al. (2010) introduced a family of
estimation methods for unnormalized models that in-
cludes nce and importance sampling as special cases.
other members of this family might be of interest for
training language models, though our preliminary re-
sults suggest that none of them outperform nce.

finally, we believe that nce can be applied to many
models other than neural or maximum-id178 lan-
guage models. probabilistic classi   ers with many
classes are a prime candidate.

acknowledgments

we thank vinayak rao and lloyd elliot for their help-
ful comments. we thank the gatsby charitable foun-
dation for generous funding.

references

bengio, yoshua and sen  ecal, jean-s  ebastien. quick
training of probabilistic neural nets by importance

a fast and simple algorithm for training neural probabilistic language models

mnih, a. and hinton, g. three new id114
for statistical language modelling. proceedings of the
24th international conference on machine learn-
ing, pp. 641   648, 2007.

mnih, a., yuecheng, z., and hinton, g. improving a
statistical language model through non-linear pre-
diction. neurocomputing, 72(7-9):1414   1418, 2009.

mnih, andriy and hinton, geo   rey. a scalable hier-
archical distributed language model. in advances in
neural information processing systems, volume 21,
2009.

morin, frederic and bengio, yoshua. hierarchical
in

probabilistic neural network language model.
aistats   05, pp. 246   252, 2005.

pihlaja, m., gutmann, m., and hyv  arinen, a. a
family of computationally e   cient and simple es-
timators for unnormalized statistical models.
in
proc. conf. on uncertainty in arti   cial intelligence
(uai2010)., 2010.

schwenk, holger and gauvain, jean-luc. training
neural network language models on very large cor-
pora. in proceedings of human language technology
conference and conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing, pp. 201   208, 2005.

socher, r., lin, c.c., ng, a.y., and manning, c.d.
parsing natural scenes and natural language with
id56s. in international confer-
ence on machine learning (icml), 2011.

stolcke, a. srilm     an extensible id38
toolkit. in proceedings of the international confer-
ence on spoken language processing, volume 2, pp.
901   904, 2002.

turian, j., ratinov, l., and bengio, y. word repre-
sentations: a simple and general method for semi-
supervised learning. in proceedings of the 48th an-
nual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, pp. 384   394, 2010.

zweig, g. and burges, c.j.c. the microsoft research
sentence completion challenge. technical report
msr-tr-2011-129, microsoft research, 2011.

sampling. in aistats   03, 2003.

bengio, yoshua and sen  ecal, jean-s  ebastien. adap-
tive importance sampling to accelerate training of a
neural probabilistic language model. ieee trans-
actions on neural networks, 19(4):713   722, 2008.

bengio, yoshua, ducharme, r  ejean, and vincent, pas-
cal. a neural probabilistic language model. in nips,
pp. 932   938, 2000.

bengio, yoshua, ducharme, rejean, vincent, pascal,
and jauvin, christian. a neural probabilistic lan-
guage model.
journal of machine learning re-
search, 3:1137   1155, 2003.

berger, a.l., pietra, v.j.d., and pietra, s.a.d. a
maximum id178 approach to natural
language
processing. computational linguistics, 22(1):39   71,
1996.

bird, s., klein, e., and loper, e. natural language

processing with python. o   reilly media, 2009.

collobert, r. and weston, j. a uni   ed architecture
for natural language processing: deep neural net-
works with multitask learning. in proceedings of the
25th international conference on machine learn-
ing, 2008.

gutmann, m. and hyv  arinen, a. noise-contrastive es-
timation: a new estimation principle for unnormal-
ized statistical models. in proc. int. conf. on ar-
ti   cial intelligence and statistics (aistats2010),
2010.

gutmann, m.u. and hyv  arinen, a. noise-contrastive
estimation of unnormalized statistical models, with
applications to natural image statistics. journal of
machine learning research, 13:307   361, 2012.

maas, a.l. and ng, a.y. a probabilistic model for
semantic word vectors. in nips 2010 workshop on
deep learning and unsupervised id171,
2010.

mikolov, t., kara     at, m., burget, l.,   cernock`y, j.,
and khudanpur, s. recurrent neural network based
language model. in eleventh annual conference of
the international speech communication associa-
tion, 2010.

mikolov, t., deoras, a., kombrink, s., burget, l.,
and   cernock`y, j. empirical evaluation and combi-
nation of advanced id38 techniques.
in proceedings of interspeech, pp. 605   608, 2011.

