5
1
0
2

 

g
u
a
2
2

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

4
v
4
3
3
6

.

2
1
4
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

leveraging monolingual data for crosslin-
gual compositional word representations

hubert soyer
national institute of informatics, tokyo, japan
soyer@nii.ac.jp

pontus stenetorp   
university of tokyo, tokyo, japan
pontus@stenetorp.se

akiko aizawa
national institute of informatics, tokyo, japan
aizawa@nii.ac.jp

abstract

in this work, we present a novel neural network based architecture for induc-
ing compositional crosslingual word representations. unlike previously proposed
methods, our method ful   lls the following three criteria; it constrains the word-
level representations to be compositional, it is capable of leveraging both bilingual
and monolingual data, and it is scalable to large vocabularies and large quantities
of data. the key component of our approach is what we refer to as a monolingual
inclusion criterion, that exploits the observation that phrases are more closely se-
mantically related to their sub-phrases than to other randomly sampled phrases.
we evaluate our method on a well-established crosslingual document classi   -
cation task and achieve results that are either comparable, or greatly improve
upon previous state-of-the-art methods. concretely, our method reaches a level
of 92.7% and 84.4% accuracy for the english to german and german to english
sub-tasks respectively. the former advances the state of the art by 0.9% points of
accuracy, the latter is an absolute improvement upon the previous state of the art
by 7.7% points of accuracy and an improvement of 33.0% in error reduction.

1

introduction

dense vector representations (embeddings) of words and phrases, as opposed to discrete feature
templates, have recently allowed for notable advances in the state of the art of natural language
processing (nlp) (socher et al., 2013; baroni et al., 2014). these representations are typically in-
duced from large unannotated corpora by predicting a word given its context (collobert & weston,
2008). unlike discrete feature templates, these representations allow supervised methods to readily
make use of unlabeled data, effectively making them semi-supervised (turian et al., 2010).

a recent focus has been on crosslingual, rather than monolingual, representations. crosslingual
representations are induced to represent words, phrases, or documents for more than one language,
where the representations are constrained to preserve representational similarity or can be trans-
formed between languages (klementiev et al., 2012; mikolov et al., 2013b; hermann & blunsom,
2014). in particular, crosslingual representations can be helpful for tasks such as translation or to
leverage training data in a source language when little or no training data is available for a target
language. examples of such id21 tasks are crosslingual id31 (wan, 2009)
and crosslingual document classi   cation (klementiev et al., 2012).

mikolov et al. (2013b) induced language-speci   c word representations, learned a linear mapping be-
tween the language-speci   c representations using bilingual word pairs and evaluated their approach

   currently at the university college london.

1

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

for single word translation. klementiev et al. (2012) used automatically aligned sentences and words
to constrain word representations across languages based on the number of times a given word in one
language was aligned to a word in another language. they also introduced a dataset for crosslingual
document classi   cation and evaluated their work on this task. hermann & blunsom (2014) intro-
duced a method to induce compositional crosslingual word representations from sentence-aligned
bilingual corpora. their method is trained to distinguish the sentence pairs given in a bilingual
corpus from randomly generated pairs. the model represents sentences as a function of their word
representations, encouraging the word representations to be compositional. another approach has
been to use auto-encoders and bag of words representations of sentences that can easily be applied
to jointly leverage both bilingual and monolingual data (chandar a p et al., 2014). most recently,
gouws et al. (2014) extended the skip-gram model of mikolov et al. (2013a) to be applicable to
bilingual data. just like the skip-gram model they predict a word in its context, but constrain the
linear combinations of word representations from aligned sentences to be similar.

from one or more of

these previous methods all suffer

however,
three short-comings.
klementiev et al. (2012); mikolov et al. (2013b); gouws et al. (2014) all learn their representations
using a word-level monolingual objective. this effectively means that compositionality is not en-
couraged by the monolingual objective, which may be problematic when composing word repre-
sentations for a phrase or document-level task. while the method of hermann & blunsom (2014)
allows for arbitrary composition functions, they are limited to using sentence-aligned bilingual data
and it is not immediately obvious how their method can be extended to make use of monolingual
data. lastly, while the method of chandar a p et al. (2014) suffers from neither of the above issues,
their method represents each sentence as a bag of words vector with the size of the whole vocabulary.
this leads to computational scaling issues and necessitates a vocabulary cut-off which may hamper
performance for compounding languages such as german.

the question that we pose is thus, can a single method

1. constrain the word-level representations to be compositional.

2. leverage both monolingual and bilingual data.

3. scale to large vocabulary sizes without greatly impacting training time.

in this work, we propose a neural network based architecture for creating crosslingual compositional
word representations. the method is agnostic to the choice of composition function and combines
a bilingual training objective with a novel way of training monolingual word representations. this
enables us to draw from a plethora of unlabeled monolingual data, while our method is ef   cient
enough to be trained using roughly seven million sentences in about six hours on a single-core
desktop computer. we evaluate our method on a well-established document classi   cation task and
achieve results for both sub-tasks that are either comparable or greatly improve upon the previous
state of the art. for the german to english sub-task our method achieves 84.4% in accuracy, an error
reduction of 33.0% in comparison to the previous state of the art.

2 model

2.1

inducing crosslingual word representations

for any task involving crosslingual word representations we distinguish between two kinds of errors

1. transfer errors occur due to transferring representations between languages. ideally, ex-
pressions of the same meaning (words, phrases, or documents) should be represented by
the same vectors, regardless of the language they are expressed in. the more different these
representations are from language 1 (l1) to language 2 (l2), the larger the transfer error.

2. monolingual errors occur because the word, phrase or id194s within
the same language are not expressive enough. for example, in the case of classi   cation
this would mean that the representations do not possess enough discriminative power for a
classi   er to achieve high accuracy.

2

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

the way to attain high performance for any task that involves crosslingual word representations is to
keep both transfer errors and monolingual errors to a minimum using representations that are both
expressive and constrained crosslingually.

2.2 creating representations for phrases and documents

following the work of klementiev et al. (2012); hermann & blunsom (2014); gouws et al. (2014)
we represent each word as a vector and use separate word representations for each language. like
hermann & blunsom (2014), we look up the vector representations for all words of a given sentence
in the corresponding lookup table and apply a composition function to transform these word vectors
into a sentence representation. to create id194s, we apply the same composition
function again, this time to transform the representations of all sentences in a document to a doc-
ument representation. for the majority of this work we will make use of the addition composition
function, which can be written as the sum of all word representations wi in a given phrase

a([w1, w2,          , wl]) =

l

x

i=1

wi

(1)

to give an example of another possible candidate composition function, we also use the bigram
based addition (bi) composition function, formalized as

b([w1, w2,          , wl]) =

l

x

i=2

tanh(wi   1, wi)

(2)

where the hyperbolic tangent (tanh) is wrapped around every word bigram to produce intermediate
results that are then summed up. by introducing a non-linear function the bi composition is no
longer a bag-of-vectors function and takes word order into account.

given that neither of the above composition functions involve any additional parameters, the only
parameters of our model are in fact the word representations that are shared globally across all
training samples.

2.3 objective

following klementiev et al. (2012) we split our objective into two sub-objectives, a bilingual objec-
tive minimizing the transfer errors and a monolingual objective minimizing the monolingual errors
for l1 and l2. we formalize the loss over the whole training set as

ltotal =

nbi

x

i=1

lbi(vl1

i , vl2

i ) +

nmono1

x

i=1

lmono(xl1

i ) +

nmono2

x

i=1

lmono(yl2

i ) +   k  k2

(3)

i

from corpora in language 1 and nmono2 sentences yl2

where lbi is the bilingual loss for two aligned sentences, vi is a sample from the set of nbi aligned
sentences in language 1 and 2, lmono is the monolingual loss which we sum over nmono1 sentences
xl1
from corpora in language 2. we learn
the parameters   , which represent the whole set of word representations for both l1 and l2. the pa-
rameters are used in a shared fashion to construct sentence representations for both the monolingual
corpora and the parts of the bilingual corpus corresponding to each language. we regularize    using
the squared euclidean norm and scale the contribution of the regularizer by   .

i

both objectives operate on vectors that represent composed versions of phrases and are agnostic
to how a phrase is transformed into a vector. the objective can therefore be used with arbitrary
composition functions.

an illustration of our proposed method can be found in figure 1.

2.3.1 bilingual objective

given a pair of aligned sentences, sl1
vl1
1 and vl2

1 in l2, we    rst compute their vector representations
1 using the composition function. since the sentences are either translations of each other

1 in l1 and sl2

3

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

german

figure 1: an illustration of our method.

or at least very close in meaning, we require their vector representations to be similar and express
this as minimizing the squared euclidean distance between vl1

1 . more formally, we write

1 and vl2

lbi(vl1 , vl2 ) = kvl1     vl2k2

(4)

for any two vector representations vl1 and vl2 corresponding to the sentences of an aligned transla-
tion pair.

the bilingual objective on its own is degenerate, since setting the vector representations of all sen-
tences to the same value poses a trivial solution. we therefore combine this bilingual objective with
a monolingual objective.

2.3.2 monolingual objective

the choice of the monolingual objective greatly in   uences the generality of models for crosslingual
word representations. klementiev et al. (2012) use a neural language model to leverage monolin-
gual data. however, this does not explicitly encourage compositionality of the word representations.
hermann & blunsom (2014) achieve good results with a noise-contrastive objective, discriminating
aligned translation pairs from randomly sampled pairs. however, their approach can only be trained
using sentence aligned data, which makes it dif   cult to extend to leverage unannotated monolingual
data. gouws et al. (2014) introduced bilbowa combining a bilingual objective with the skip-gram
model proposed by mikolov et al. (2013a) which predicts the context of a word given the word itself.
they achieve high accuracy on the german     english sub-task of the crosslingual document
classi   cation task introduced by klementiev et al. (2012). chandar a p et al. (2014) presented a
bag-of-words auto-encoder model which is the current state of the art for the english     german
sub-task for the same task. both the auto-encoder based model and bilbowa require a sentence-
aligned bilingual corpus, but in addition are capable of leveraging monolingual data. however, due
to their bag-of-words based nature, their architectures implicitly restrict how sentence representa-
tions are composed from word representations.

we extend the idea of the noise-contrastive objective given by hermann & blunsom (2014) to the
monolingual setting and propose a framework that, like theirs, is agnostic to the choice of compo-
sition function and operates on the phrase level. however, our framework, unlike theirs, is able to
leverage monolingual data. our key novel idea is based on the observation that phrases are typically
more similar to their sub-phrases than to randomly sampled phrases. we leverage this insight using
the hinge loss as follows

lmono(aouter, ainner, bnoise) = [max(0, m + kaouter

c

k2     kaouter

c

lmono(a) = lmono(aouter, ainner, bnoise)
    ainner
{z
len(ainner)
len(aouter)

|
+ kaouter

    ainner

hinge loss

k2]   

c

c

c

(5)
(6)

    bnoise

c

k2)
}

4

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

figure 2: examples illustrating the inclusion criterion which we use to leverage monolingual text.

where m is a margin, aouter is a phrase sampled from a sentence, ainner is a sub-phrase of aouter
and bnoise is a phrase extracted from a sentence that was sampled uniformly from the corpus. the
start and end positions of both phrases and the sub-phrase were chosen uniformly at random within
their context and constrained to guarantee a minimum length of 3 words. subscript c denotes that a
phrase has been transformed into its vector representation. we add kaouter
k2 to the hinge
loss to reduce the in   uence of the margin as a hyperparameter and to make sure that the we retain an
error signal even after the hinge loss objective is satis   ed. to compensate for differences in phrase
and sub-phrase length we scale the error by the ratio between the number of words in the outer
phrase and the inner phrase. minimizing this objective captures the intuition stated above; a phrase
should generally be closer to its sub-phrases, than to randomly sampled phrases.

    ainner

c

c

the examples in figure 2 seek to further clarify this observation. in both examples, the blue area
represents the outer phrase (aouter), the red area covers the inner sub-phrase (ainner), and the gray
area marks a randomly selected phrase in a randomly sampled noise sentence. the inner workings of
the monolingual inclusion objective only become clear when more than one example is considered.
in example 1, ainner is embedded in the same context as in example 2, while in both examples
aouter is contrasted with the same noise phrase. minimizing the objective brings the representations
of both likes to drink beer and likes to eat chips closer to the phrase they are embedded in and makes
them less similar to the same noise sentence. since in both examples the outer phrases are very
similar, this causes likes to drink beer and likes to eat chips to be similar. while we picked idealized
sentences for demonstration purposes, this relative notion still holds in practice to varying degrees
depending on the choice of sentences.

in contrast to many recently introduced id148, like the skip-gram model, where word
vectors are similar if they appear as the center of similar word windows, our proposed objective,
using addition for composition, encourages word vectors to be similar if they tend to be embedded
in similar phrases. the major difference between these two formulations manifests itself for words
that appear close or next to each other very frequently. these word pairs are not usually the center
of the same word windows, but they are embedded together in the same phrases.

for example: the two word central context of    eat    is    to    and    chips   , whereas the context of
   chips    would be    eat    and    when   . using the skip-gram model this would cause    chips    and
   eat    to be less similar, with    chips    probably being similar to other words related to food and    eat   
being similar to other verbs. employing the inclusion objective, the representations for    eat    and
   chips    will end up close to each other since they tend to be embedded in the same phrases. this
causes the word representations induced by the inclusion criterion to be more topical in nature. we
hypothesize that this property is particularly useful for document classi   cation.

3 experiments

3.1 crosslingual document classification

crosslingual document classi   cation constitutes a task where a classi   er is trained to classify doc-
uments in one language (l1) and is later applied to documents in a different language (l2). this
requires either transforming the classi   er itself to    t the new language or transforming/sharing rep-
resentations of the text for both languages. the crosslingual word and id194s

5

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

table 1: statistics from the corpora used to induce crosslingual word representations listing type,
frequency threshold for turning tokens into unks, the number of sentences, the number of tokens
and the vocabulary size. the statistics were calculated on the preprocessed versions of the corpora.

europarl (en)
europarl (de)
reuters (en)
reuters (de)

type
bilingual
bilingual
monolingual
monolingual

unk threshold
2
2
5
3

#sentences
1.66 million
1.66 million
4.5 million
0.9 million

#tokens
46 million
48 million
120 million
18 million

|v |
51,000
163,000
114,000
117,000

induced using the approach proposed in this work present an intuitive way to tackle crosslingual
document classi   cation.

like previous work, we evaluate our method on the crosslingual document classi   cation task intro-
duced by klementiev et al. (2012). the goal is to correctly classify news articles taken from the
english and german sections of the rcv1 and rcv2 corpus (lewis et al., 2004) into one of four
categories: economics, government/social, markets, or corporate. maintaining the original setup,
we train an averaged id88 (collins, 2002) for 10 iterations on representations of documents
in one language (english/german) and evaluate its performance on representations of documents in
the corresponding other language (german/english).

we use the original data and the original implementation of the averaged id88 used by
klementiev et al. (2012) to evaluate the id194s created by our method. there
are different versions of the training set of varying sizes, ranging from 100 to 10,000 documents,
and the test sets for both languages contain 5,000 documents. most related work only reports results
using the 1,000 documents sized training set. following previous work, we tune the hyperparameters
of our model on held out documents in the same language that the model was trained on.

3.2

inducing crosslingual word representations

to induce representations using the method proposed in this work, we require at least a bilingual
corpus of aligned sentences. in addition, our model allows the representations to draw upon mono-
lingual data from either or both languages. like klementiev et al. (2012) we choose europarl v7
(koehn, 2005) as our bilingual corpus and leverage the english and german parts of the rcv1 and
rcv2 corpora as monolingual resources. to avoid a testing bias, we exclude all documents that are
part of the crosslingual classi   cation task. we detect sentence boundaries using pre-trained models
of the punkt tokenizer (kiss & strunk, 2006) shipped with nltk1 and perform id121 and
lowercasing with the scripts deployed with the cdec decoder2. following turian et al. (2010) we re-
move all english sentences (and their german correspondences in europarl) that have a
ratio of less than 0.9. this affects mainly headlines and reports with numbers. in total it reduces
the number of sentences in europarl by about 255, 000 and the english part of the reuters corpus
by about 8 million. since german features more upper case characters than english we set the cut-
off ratio to 0.7, which reduces the number of sentences by around 620, 000. further, we replace
words that occur less than a certain threshold by an unk token. corpus statistics and thresholds are
reported in table 1.

nonlowercase

lowercase

we initialize all word representations with noise samples from a gaussian with    = 0,    = 0.1
and optimize them in a stochastic setting to minimize the objective de   ned in equation 3. to speed
up the convergence of training we use adagrad (duchi et al., 2011). we tuned all hyperparameters
of our model and explored learning rates around 0.2, mini-batch sizes around 40,000, hinge loss
margins around 40 (since our vector dimensionality is 40) and    (id173) around 1.0. we
trained all versions that use the full monolingual data for 25 iterations (= 25    4.5 million samples)
and the versions only involving bilingual data for 100 iterations on their training sets. training
our model3, implemented in a high-level, id145 language (bezanson et al., 2012),

1http://www.nltk.org/
2http://www.cdec-decoder.org/
3our implementation is available at https://github.com/ogh/binclusion

6

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

table 2: results for our proposed models, baselines, and related work. all results are reported
for a training set size of 1,000 documents for each language. we refer to our proposed method as
binclusion.

training data

en     de de     en

method
machine translation
glossed
majority class
i-matrix
add
bae-cr
bae-cr
bae-cr
bilbowa
binclusion
binclusion
binclusion
binclusion (reduced vocabulary)
binclusion
binclusion (bi)

(klementiev et al., 2012) eurofullreuters

(hermann & blunsom, 2014) euro500k
(chandar a p et al., 2014) euro500k
(chandar a p et al., 2014) euro500kreuters
(chandar a p et al., 2014) eurofullreuters

(gouws et al., 2014) euro500k
euro500k
eurofull
euro500kreuters
euro500kreuters
eurofullreuters
eurofullreuters

68.1
65.1
46.8
77.6
83.7
86.1
87.9
91.8
86.5
86.8
87.8
92.7
92.6
90.8
89.8

67.4
68.6
46.8
71.1
71.4
68.8
76.7
74.2
75.0
76.7
75.7
84.4
82.8
79.5
80.1

for the largest set of data takes roughly six hours on a single-core desktop computer. this can be
compared to for example chandar a p et al. (2014) which train their auto-encoder model for 3.5
days.

4 results

4.1 crosslingual document classification

we compare our method to various architectures introduced in previous work. as these meth-
ods differ in their ability to handle monolingual data, we evaluate several versions of our model
using different data sources and sizes for training. also, we follow the lines of previous work
and use 40-dimensional word representations. we report results when using the    rst 500,000 sen-
tence pairs of europarl (euro500k), the full europarl corpus (eurofull), the    rst 500,000 sentence
pairs of europarl and the german and english text from the reuters corpus as monolingual data
(euro500kreuters), and one version using the full europarl and reuters corpus (eurofullreuters).
table 2 shows results for all these con   gurations. the result table includes previous work as well as
the glossed, the machine translation and the majority class baselines from klementiev et al. (2012).

our method achieves results that are comparable or improve upon the previous state of the art for all
dataset con   gurations. it advances the state of the art for the en     de sub-task by 0.9% points
of accuracy and greatly outperforms the previous state of the art for the de     en sub-task, where
it yields an absolute improvement of 7.7% points of accuracy. the latter corresponds to an error
reduction of 33.0% in comparison to the previous state of the art.
an important observation is that including monolingual data is strongly bene   cial for the classi   ca-
tion accuracy. we found increases in performance to 80.6% for de     en and 88.6% accuracy
for en     de, even when using as little as 5% of the monolingual data. we hypothesize that
the key cause of this effect is id20. from this observation it is also worth pointing
out that our method is on par with the previous state of the art for the de     en sub-task using
no monolingual training data and would improve upon it using as little as 5% of the monolingual
data. to show that our method achieves high accuracy even with a reduced vocabulary, we discard
representations for infrequent terms and report results using our best setup with the same vocabulary
size as klementiev et al. (2012).

7

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

table 3: german nearest neighbors for english words that only appear in the monolingual data.

english

german

soybeans
mais
alkoholherstellung
silomais
genmais
gluten

forex
drachme
liquidit  atsfalle
bankenliquidit  at
abnutzung
pf  andung

s&p
ratings
ratingindustrie
ratingbranche
ratingstiftung
kreditratingagenturen minderheitenaktion  aren

stockholders
aktion  arsschutz
minderheitenaktion  are
aktion  arsrechte
aktion  are

table 4: english words and their nearest neighbors in the induced space, demonstrating the topical
nature of the word representations.

query

neighbors

intel
pentium

kabul
taliban
talibans microprocessor
taleban
masood microprocessors
dostum netscape

ibm

transport
traf   c
transporting
transports
dockworkers
transportation

   y
air
   ying
   ight
airspace
naval

4.2

interesting properties of the induced crosslingual word representations

for a bilingual word representation model that uses monolingual data, the most dif   cult cases to
resolve are words appearing in the monolingual data, but not in the bilingual data. since the model
does not have any kind of direct signal regarding what translations these words should correspond to,
their location in the vector space is entirely determined by how the monolingual objective arranges
them. therefore, looking speci   cally at these dif   cult examples presents a good way to get an
impression of how well the monolingual and bilingual objective complement each other.

in table 3, we list some of the most frequently occurring words that are present in the monolingual
data but not in the bilingual data. the nearest neighbors are topically strongly related to their cor-
responding queries. for example, the credit-rating agency standard & poor   s (s&p) is matched to
rating-related words, soybeans is proximal to crop and food related terms, forex features a list of
currency related terms, and the list for stockholders, includes aktion  are, its correct german transla-
tion. this speaks strongly in favor of how our objectives complement each other, even though these
words were only observed in the monolingual data they relate sensibly across languages.

to convey an impression of how the induced representations behave, not interlingually, but within
the same language, we list some examples in table 4. the semi-conductor chip maker intel, is very
close to it-related companies like ibm or netscape and also to microprocessor-related terms. for the
verb    y, the nearest neighbors not only include forms like    ying, but also related nouns like airspace
or air, underlining the topical nature of our proposed objective.

5 conclusion and future work

in this work we introduced a method that can induce compositional crosslingual word representa-
tions while scaling to large datasets. our novel approach for learning monolingual representations
integrates naturally with our bilingual objective and allows us to make use of sentence-aligned bilin-
gual corpora as well as monolingual data. the method is agnostic to the choice of composition func-
tion, enabling more complex (e.g. preserving word order information) ways to compose phrase rep-
resentations from word representations. for crosslingual document classi   cation (klementiev et al.,
2012) our models perform comparably or greatly improve upon previously reported results.

to increase the expressiveness of our method we plan to investigate more complex composition
functions, possibly based on convolution to preserve word order information. we consider the mono-
lingual inclusion objective worthy of further research on its own and will evaluate its performance
in comparison to related methods when learning word representations from monolingual data.

8

published as a conference paper at iclr 2015

acknowledgements

this work was supported by the data centric science research commons project at the research
organization of information and systems and by the japan society for the promotion of science
kakenhi grant number 13f03041.

references
baroni, marco, dinu, georgiana, and kruszewski, germ  an. don   t count, predict! a systematic
comparison of context-counting vs. context-predicting semantic vectors. in acl, pp. 238   247,
2014.

bezanson, jeff, karpinski, stefan, shah, viral b., and edelman, alan.

julia: a fast dynamic

language for technical computing. arxiv, abs/1209.5145, september 2012.

chandar a p, sarath, lauly, stanislas, larochelle, hugo, khapra, mitesh, ravindran, balaraman,
raykar, vikas c, and saha, amrita. an autoencoder approach to learning bilingual word
representations. in nips, pp. 1853   1861. 2014.

collins, michael. discriminative training methods for id48: theory and exper-

iments with id88 algorithms. in emnlp, pp. 1   8, 2002.

collobert, ronan and weston, jason. a uni   ed architecture for natural language processing:

deep neural networks with multitask learning. in icml, pp. 160   167, 2008.

duchi, john, hazan, elad, and singer, yoram. adaptive subgradient methods for online learning

and stochastic optimization. jmlr, 12:2121   2159, 2011.

gouws, stephan, bengio, yoshua, and corrado, greg. bilbowa: fast bilingual distributed repre-

sentations without word alignments. arxiv, abs/1410.2455, 2014.

hermann, karl moritz and blunsom, phil. multilingual models for compositional distributed se-

mantics. in acl, pp. 58   68, 2014.

kiss, tibor and strunk, jan. unsupervised multilingual sentence boundary detection. cl, 32(4):

485   525, 2006.

klementiev, alexandre, titov, ivan, and bhattarai, binod. inducing crosslingual distributed rep-

resentations of words. in coling, pp. 1459   1474, 2012.

koehn, philipp. europarl: a parallel corpus for id151.

volume 5, pp. 79   86, 2005.

in mt summit,

lewis, david d., yang, yiming, rose, tony g., and li, fan. rcv1: a new benchmark collection

for text categorization research. jmlr, 5:361   397, 2004.

mikolov, tomas, chen, kai, corrado, greg, and dean, jeffrey. ef   cient estimation of word repre-

sentations in vector space. in iclr workshop, 2013a.

mikolov, tomas, le, quoc v., and sutskever, ilya. exploiting similarities among languages for

machine translation. arxiv, abs/1309.4168, 2013b.

socher, richard, perelygin, alex, wu, jean, chuang, jason, manning, christopher d., ng, andrew,
and potts, christopher. recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. in emnlp, pp. 1631   1642, 2013.

turian, joseph, ratinov, lev-arie, and bengio, yoshua. word representations: a simple and general

method for semi-supervised learning. in acl, pp. 384   394, 2010.

wan, xiaojun. co-training for cross-lingual sentiment classi   cation. in acl, pp. 235   243, 2009.

9

