movie description

anna rohrbach    atousa torabi    marcus rohrbach    niket tandon   
christopher pal    hugo larochelle    aaron courville    bernt schiele

6
1
0
2

 

y
a
m
2
1

 

 
 
]

v
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
0
7
3
0

.

5
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract audio description (ad) provides linguistic
descriptions of movies and allows visually impaired peo-
ple to follow a movie along with their peers. such de-
scriptions are by design mainly visual and thus natu-
rally form an interesting data source for computer vi-
sion and computational linguistics. in this work we pro-
pose a novel dataset which contains transcribed ads,
which are temporally aligned to full length movies. in
addition we also collected and aligned movie scripts
used in prior work and compare the two sources of
descriptions. in total the large scale movie descrip-
tion challenge (lsmdc) contains a parallel corpus of
118,114 sentences and video clips from 202 movies. first
we characterize the dataset by benchmarking di   erent
approaches for generating video descriptions. compar-
ing ads to scripts, we    nd that ads are indeed more
visual and describe precisely what is shown rather than
what should happen according to the scripts created
prior to movie production. furthermore, we present and
compare the results of several teams who participated
in a challenge organized in the context of the workshop
   describing and understanding video & the large scale
movie description challenge (lsmdc)   , at iccv 2015.

anna rohrbach 1    atousa torabi3    marcus rohrbach2   
niket tandon 1    christopher pal4    hugo larochelle5,6   
aaron courville7    bernt schiele1
1 max planck institute for informatics, saarbr  ucken, ger-
many
2 icsi and eecs, uc berkeley, united states
3 disney research, pittsburgh, united states
4   ecole polytechnique de montr  eal, montr  eal, canada
5 universit  e de sherbrooke, sherbrooke, canada
6 twitter, cambridge, united states
7 universit  e de montr  eal, montr  eal, canada

ad: abby gets in
the basket.

mike leans over and
sees how high they
are.

script: after
a
moment a frazzled
abby pops up in his
place.

mike looks down to
see     they are now
   fteen feet above the
ground.

clasps
her
abby
hands
around his
face and kisses him
passionately.
for the    rst time in
her life, she stops
thinking and grabs
mike and kisses the
hell out of him.

figure 1 audio description (ad) and movie script samples
from the movie    ugly truth   .

1 introduction

audio descriptions (ads) make movies accessible to
millions of blind or visually impaired people1. ad    
sometimes also referred to as descriptive video ser-
vice (dvs)     provides an audio narrative of the    most
important aspects of the visual information    (salway
2007), namely actions, gestures, scenes, and character
appearance as can be seen in figures 1 and 2. ad is
prepared by trained describers and read by professional
narrators. while more and more movies are audio tran-
scribed, it may take up to 60 person-hours to describe
a 2-hour movie (lakritz and salway 2006), resulting in
the fact that today only a small subset of movies and
tv programs are available for the blind. consequently,
automating this process has the potential to greatly in-
crease accessibility to this media.

1 in this work we refer for simplicity to    the blind    to ac-
count for all blind and visually impaired people which bene   t
from ad, knowing of the variety of visually impaired and that
ad is not accessible to all.

2

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

ad: buckbeak rears and
attacks malfoy.

script: in a    ash, buck-
beak   s steely talons slash
down.

malfoy freezes.

looks down at the blood
blossoming on his robes.

hagrid lifts malfoy up.

as hagrid carries malfoy
away, the hippogri    gen-
tly nudges harry.
buckbeak whips around,
raises its talons and -
seeing harry -
lowers
them.

ad: another room, the
wife and mother sits at a
window with a towel over
her hair.
script: debbie opens a
window and sneaks a
cigarette.

she smokes a cigarette
with a latex-gloved hand.

she holds her cigarette
with a yellow dish wash-
ing glove.

putting the cigarette out,
she uncovers her hair, re-
moves the glove and pops
gum in her mouth.
she puts out the cigarette
and goes through an elab-
orate routine of hiding
the smell of smoke.

she pats her face and
hands with a wipe, then
sprays herself with per-
fume.
she puts some weird oil
in her hair and uses a
wet nap on her neck and
clothes and brushes her
teeth.

she pats her face and
hands with a wipe, then
sprays herself with per-
fume.
she sprays cologne and
walks through it.

ad: they rush out onto
the street.

a man is trapped under a
cart.

valjean is crouched down
beside him.

script: valjean
and
javert hurry out across
the
factory yard and
down the muddy track
beyond to discover -

a heavily laden cart has
toppled onto the
cart
driver.

javert
assistant

and
valjean,
javert   s
all
hurry to help, but they
can   t get a proper pur-
chase
spongy
ground.

the

in

javert watches as valjean
places his shoulder under
the shaft.
he throws himself under
the cart at this higher
end, and braces himself
to lift it from beneath.

javert   s eyes narrow.

javert stands back and
looks on.

figure 2 audio description (ad) and movie script samples from the movies    harry potter and the prisoner of azkaban   ,
   this is 40   , and    les miserables   . typical mistakes contained in scripts marked in red italic.

in addition to the bene   ts for the blind, generat-
ing descriptions for video is an interesting task in it-
self, requiring the combination of core techniques from
id161 and computational linguistics. to un-
derstand the visual input one has to reliably recognize
scenes, human activities, and participating objects. to
generate a good description one has to decide what
part of the visual information to verbalize, i.e. recog-
nize what is salient.

large datasets of objects (deng et al. 2009) and
scenes (xiao et al. 2010; zhou et al. 2014) have had an
important impact in id161 and have signif-
icantly improved our ability to recognize objects and
scenes. the combination of large datasets and convo-
lutional neural networks (id98s) has been particularly
potent (krizhevsky et al. 2012). to be able to learn
how to generate descriptions of visual content, parallel
datasets of visual content paired with descriptions are
indispensable (rohrbach et al. 2013). while recently
several large datasets have been released which provide
images with descriptions (hodosh et al. 2014; lin et al.
2014; ordonez et al. 2011), video description datasets

focus on short video clips with single sentence descrip-
tions and have a limited number of video clips (xu et al.
2016; chen and dolan 2011) or are not publicly avail-
able (over et al. 2012). tacos multi-level (rohrbach
et al. 2014) and youcook (das et al. 2013) are excep-
tions as they provide multiple sentence descriptions and
longer videos. while these corpora pose challenges in
terms of    ne-grained recognition, they are restricted
to the cooking scenario. in contrast, movies are open
domain and realistic, even though, as any other video
source (e.g. youtube or surveillance videos), they have
their speci   c characteristics. ads and scripts associ-
ated with movies provide rich multiple sentence descrip-
tions. they even go beyond this by telling a story which
means they facilitate the study of how to extract plots,
the understanding of long term semantic dependencies
and human interactions from both visual and textual
data.

figures 1 and 2 show examples of ads and com-
pare them to movie scripts. scripts have been used for
various tasks (cour et al. 2008; duchenne et al. 2009;
laptev et al. 2008; liang et al. 2011; marszalek et al.

movie description

3

figure 3 some of the diverse verbs / actions present in our large scale movie description challenge (lsmdc).

2009), but so far not for video description. the main
reason for this is that automatic alignment frequently
fails due to the discrepancy between the movie and the
script. as scripts are typically produced prior to the
shooting of the movie they are frequently not as precise
as the ad (figure 2 shows such mistakes marked in
red). a typical case is that part of the sentence is cor-
rect, while another part contains irrelevant information.
as can be seen in the examples, ad narrations describe
key visual elements of the video such as changes in the
scene, people   s appearance, gestures, actions, and their
interaction with each other and the scene   s objects in
concise and precise language. figure 3 shows the vari-
ability of ad data w.r.t. to verbs (actions) and corre-
sponding scenes from the movies.

in this work we present a dataset which provides

transcribed ads, aligned to full length movies. ad sound-
tracks are carefully positioned within movies to    t in
natural pauses in the dialogue and are mixed with the
original movie soundtrack by professional post-production.
for this we retrieve audio streams from dvds and blu-
ray disks, segment out the sections of the ad audio and
transcribe them via a crowd-sourced transcription ser-
vice. the ads provide an initial temporal alignment,
which however does not always cover the full activ-
ity in the video. we discuss a way to fully automate
both audio-segmentation and temporal alignment, but
also manually align each sentence to the movie for the
majority of the data. therefore, in contrast to salway
(2007) and salway et al. (2007), our dataset provides
alignment to the actions in the video, rather than just
to the audio track of the description. in addition we also
mine existing movie scripts, pre-align them automati-
cally, similar to cour et al. (2008) and laptev et al.
(2008), and then manually align the sentences to the
movie.

as a    rst study on our dataset we benchmark sev-
eral approaches for movie description. we    rst examine

nearest neighbour retrieval using diverse visual features
which do not require any additional labels, but retrieve
sentences from the training data. second, we adapt the
approach of rohrbach et al. (2013) by automatically ex-
tracting the semantic representation from the sentences
using id29. third, based on the success of
id137 (lstms) (hochre-
iter and schmidhuber 1997) for the image captioning
problem (donahue et al. 2015; karpathy and fei-fei
2015; kiros et al. 2015; vinyals et al. 2015) we pro-
pose our approachvisual-labels. it    rst builds robust
visual classi   ers which distinguish verbs, objects, and
places extracted from weak sentence annotations. then
the visual classi   ers form the input to an lstm for
generating movie descriptions.

the main contribution of this work is the large
scale movie description challenge (lsmdc)2 which
provides transcribed and aligned ad and script data
sentences. the lsmdc 2015 has been presented at the
workshop    describing and understanding video & the
large scale movie description challenge (lsmdc)   ,
collocated with iccv 2015. we are in progress of set-
ting up the lsmdc 2016 which will be presented at
the    joint workshop on storytelling with images and
videos and large scale movie description and un-
derstanding challenge   , collocated with eccv 2016.
the challenge includes a public and blind test set and
evaluation server3 for automatic evaluation. lsmdc is
based on the mpii movie description dataset (mpii-
md) and the montreal video annotation dataset (m-
vad) which were initially collected independently but
are presented jointly in this work. we detail the data
collection and dataset properties in section 3, which in-
cludes our approach to automatically collect and align
ad data. in section 4 we present several benchmark

2 https://sites.google.com/site/describingmovies/
3 https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/6121

visualfeaturessomeoneenterdoorroomsubjectlocationverbobjectcrfclassifier scoressmtsomeone enters the room.smt-basedplaces-id98lsdaidtplaces class. scoresobject class. scoresverb class. scoreslstm-basedselect robust classifierslstmconcatconcatconcatsomeoneentersthelstmlstmconcatroomlstmwavetake offpunchdancegiveopengrabclimbdrinkenterfallget outdrive offjumpeat4

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

approaches for movie description, including our visual-
labels approach which learns robust visual classi   ers
and generates description using an lstm. in section 5
we present an evaluation of the benchmark approaches
on the m-vad and mpii-md datasets, analyzing the
in   uence of the di   erent design choices. using auto-
matic and human evaluation, we also show that our
visual-labels approach outperforms prior work on both
datasets. in section 5.5 we perform an analysis of prior
work and our approach to understand the challenges of
the movie description task. in section 6 we present and
discuss the results of the large scale movie descrip-
tion challenge 2015, which we held in conjunction with
iccv 2015.

this work is partially based on the original publica-
tions from rohrbach et al. (2015c,b) and the technical
report from torabi et al. (2015). torabi et al. (2015)
collected m-vad, rohrbach et al. (2015c) collected the
mpii-md dataset and presented the smt-based de-
scription approach. rohrbach et al. (2015b) proposed
the visual-labels approach.

2 related work

we discuss recent approaches to image and video de-
scription including existing work using movie scripts
and ads. we also discuss works which build on our
dataset. we compare our proposed dataset to related
video description datasets in table 3 (section 3.5).

2.1 image description

prior work on image description includes farhadi et al.
(2010); kulkarni et al. (2011); kuznetsova et al. (2012);
li et al. (2011); kuznetsova et al. (2014); mitchell et al.
(2012); socher et al. (2014). recently image description
has gained increased attention with work such as that
of chen and zitnick (2015); donahue et al. (2015); fang
et al. (2015); karpathy and fei-fei (2015); kiros et al.
(2014, 2015); mao et al. (2015); vinyals et al. (2015);
xu et al. (2015a). much of the recent work has relied
on recurrent neural networks (id56s) and in partic-
ular on id137 (lstms).
new datasets have been released, such as the flickr30k
(young et al. 2014) and ms coco captions (chen
et al. 2015), where chen et al. (2015) also presents
a standardized protocol for image captioning evalua-
tion. other work has analyzed the performance of re-
cent methods, e.g. devlin et al. (2015) compare them
with respect to the novelty of generated descriptions,
while also exploring a nearest neighbor baseline that
improves over recent methods.

2.2 video description

in the past video description has been addressed in
controlled settings (barbu et al. 2012; kojima et al.
2002), on a small scale (das et al. 2013; guadarrama
et al. 2013; thomason et al. 2014) or in single do-
mains like cooking (rohrbach et al. 2014, 2013; don-
ahue et al. 2015). donahue et al. (2015)    rst proposed
to describe videos using an lstm, relying on precom-
puted crf scores from rohrbach et al. (2014). later
venugopalan et al. (2015c) extended this work to ex-
tract id98 features from frames which are max-pooled
over time. pan et al. (2016b) propose a framework that
consists of a 2-/3-d id98 and lstm trained jointly
with a visual-semantic embedding to ensure better co-
herence between video and text. xu et al. (2015b) jointly
address the language generation and video/language re-
trieval tasks by learning a joint embedding for a deep
video model and a compositional semantic language
model. li et al. (2015) study the problem of summa-
rizing a long video to a single concise description by
using ranking based summarization of multiple gener-
ated candidate sentences.

concurrent and consequent work. to handle the chal-
lenging scenario of movie description, yao et al. (2015)
propose a soft-attention based model which selects the
most relevant temporal segments in a video, incorpo-
rates 3-d id98 and generates a sentence using an lstm.
venugopalan et al. (2015b) propose s2vt, an encoder-
decoder framework, where a single lstm encodes the
input video frame by frame and decodes it into a sen-
tence. pan et al. (2016a) extend the video encoding idea
by introducing a second lstm layer which receives in-
put of the    rst layer, but skips several frames, reducing
its temporal depth. venugopalan et al. (2016) explore
the bene   t of pre-trained id27s and lan-
guage models for generation on large external text cor-
pora. shetty and laaksonen (2015) evaluate di   erent
visual features as input for an lstm generation frame-
work. speci   cally they use dense trajectory features
wang et al. (2013) extracted for the clips and id98 fea-
tures extracted at center frames of the clip. they    nd
that training concept classi   ers on ms coco with the
id98 features, combined with dense trajectories pro-
vides the best input for the lstm. ballas et al. (2016)
leverages multiple convolutional maps from di   erent
id98 layers to improve the visual representation for ac-
tivity and video description. to model multi-sentence
description, yu et al. (2016) propose to use two stacked
id56s where the    rst one models words within a sen-
tence and the second one, sentences within a paragraph.
yao et al. (2016) has conducted an interesting study on

movie description

5

performance upper bounds for both image and video
description tasks on available datasets, including the
lsmdc dataset.

2.3 movie scripts and audio descriptions

movie scripts have been used for automatic discovery
and annotation of scenes and human actions in videos
(duchenne et al. 2009; laptev et al. 2008; marszalek
et al. 2009), as well as a resource to construct activ-
ity knowledge base (tandon et al. 2015; de melo and
tandon 2016). we rely on the approach presented by
laptev et al. (2008) to align movie scripts using subti-
tles.

bojanowski et al. (2013) approach the problem of
learning a joint model of actors and actions in movies
using weak supervision provided by scripts. they rely
on the semantic parser semafor (das et al. 2012)
trained on the framenet database (baker et al. 1998),
however, they limit the recognition only to two frames.
bojanowski et al. (2014) aim to localize individual short
actions in longer clips by exploiting the ordering con-
straints as weak supervision. bojanowski et al. (2013,
2014); duchenne et al. (2009); laptev et al. (2008);
marszalek et al. (2009) proposed datasets focused on
extracting several activities from movies. most of them
are part of the    hollywood2    dataset (marszalek et al.
2009) which contains 69 movies and 3669 clips. another
line of work (cour et al. 2009; everingham et al. 2006;
ramanathan et al. 2014; sivic et al. 2009; tapaswi et al.
2012) proposed datasets for character identi   cation tar-
geting tv shows. all the mentioned datasets rely on
alignments to movie/tv scripts and none uses ads.

ads have also been used to understand which char-
acters interact with each other (salway et al. 2007).
other prior work has looked at supporting ad produc-
tion using scripts as an information source (lakritz and
salway 2006) and automatically    nding scene bound-
aries (gagnon et al. 2010). salway (2007) analyses the
linguistic properties on a non-public corpus of ads from
91 movies. their corpus is based on the original sources
to create the ads and contains di   erent kinds of arti-
facts not present in actual description, such as dialogs
and production notes. in contrast, our text corpus is
much cleaner as it consists only of the actual ads.

our ad transcripts for building their movieqa dataset,
which asks natural language questions about movies, re-
quiring an understanding of visual and textual informa-
tion, such as dialogue and ad, to answer the question.
zhu et al. (2015a) present a    ll-in-the-blank challenge
for audio description of the current, previous, and next
sentence description for a given clip, requiring to un-
derstand the temporal context of the clips.

3 datasets for movie description

in the following, we present how we collected our data
for movie description and discuss its properties. the
large scale movie description challenge (lsmdc) is
based on two datasets which were originally collected
independently. the mpii movie description dataset
(mpii-md), initially presented by rohrbach et al. (2015c),
was collected from blu-ray movie data. it consists of ad
and script data and uses sentence-level manual align-
ment of transcribed audio to the actions in the video
(section 3.1). in section 3.2 we discuss how to fully au-
tomate ad audio segmentation and alignment for the
montreal video annotation dataset (m-vad), initially
presented by torabi et al. (2015). m-vad was collected
with dvd data quality and only relies on ad. sec-
tion 3.3 details the large scale movie description chal-
lenge (lsmdc) which is based on m-vad and mpii-
md, but also contains additional movies, and was set
up as a challenge and includes a submission server using
a public and blind test sets. in section 3.4 we present
the detailed statistics of our datasets, also see table 1.
in section 3.5 we compare our movie description data
to other video description datasets.

3.1 the mpii movie description (mpii-md) dataset

in the following we describe the approach behind the
collection of ads (section 3.1.1) and script data (sec-
tion 3.1.2). then we discuss how to manually align them
to the video (section 3.1.3) and which visual features
we extracted from the video (section 3.1.4).

3.1.1 collection of ads

2.4 works building on our dataset

interestingly, other works, datasets, and challenges are
already building upon our data. zhu et al. (2015b) learn
a visual-semantic embedding from our clips and ads
to relate movies to books. tapaswi et al. (2016) used

we search for blu-ray movies with ads in the    audio
description    section of the british amazon4 and select
a set of movies of diverse genres. as ads are only avail-
able in audio format, we    rst retrieve the audio stream

4 www.amazon.co.uk

6

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

from the blu-ray hd disks. we use makemkv5 to ex-
tract a blu-ray in the .mkv    le format, then xmediare-
code6 to select and extract the audio streams from it.
then we semi-automatically segment out the sections
of the ad audio (which is mixed with the original audio
stream) with the approach described below. the audio
segments are then transcribed by a crowd-sourced tran-
scription service7 that also provides us the time-stamps
for each spoken sentence.

we extract the subtitles from the blu-ray disks with
subtitleedit9. it also allows for subtitle alignment and
spellchecking. then we use the id145
method of (laptev et al. 2008) to align scripts to sub-
titles and infer the time-stamps for the description sen-
tences. we select the sentences with a reliable alignment
score (the ratio of matched words in the near-by mono-
logues) of at least 0.5. the obtained sentences are then
manually aligned to video in-house.

semi-automatic segmentation of ads. we are given two
audio streams: the original audio and the one mixed
with the ad. we    rst estimate the temporal alignment
between the two as there might be a few time frames dif-
ference. the precise alignment is important to compute
the similarity of both streams. both steps (alignment
and similarity) are estimated using the spectograms
of the audio stream, which is computed using a fast
fourier transform (fft). if the di   erence between the
two audio streams is larger than a given threshold we
assume the mixed stream contains ad at that point in
time. we smooth this decision over time using a min-
imum segment length of 1 second. the threshold was
picked on a few sample movies, but had to be adjusted
for each movie due to di   erent mixing of the ad stream,
di   erent narrator voice level, and movie sound. while
we found this semi-automatic approach su   cient when
using a further manual alignment, we describe a fully
automatic procedure in section 3.2.

3.1.3 manual sentence-video alignment

as the ad is added to the original audio stream be-
tween the dialogs, there might be a small misalign-
ment between the time of speech and the correspond-
ing visual content. therefore, we manually align each
sentence from ads and scripts to the movie in-house.
during the manual alignment we also    lter out: a) sen-
tences describing movie introduction/ending (produc-
tion logo, cast, etc); b) texts read from the screen; c)
irrelevant sentences describing something not present in
the video; d) sentences related to audio/sounds/music.
for the movie scripts, the reduction in number of words
is about 19%, while for ads it is under 4%. in the case
of ads,    ltering mainly happens due to initial/ending
movie intervals and transcribed dialogs (when shown as
text). for the scripts, it is mainly attributed to irrele-
vant sentences. note that we retain the sentences that
are    alignable    but contain minor mistakes.

3.1.2 collection of script data

3.1.4 visual features

in addition to the ads we mine script web resources8
and select 39 movie scripts. as starting point we use
the movie scripts from    hollywood2    (marszalek et al.
2009) that have highest alignment scores to their movie.
we are also interested in comparing the two sources
(movie scripts and ads), so we are looking for the
scripts labeled as    final   ,    shooting   , or    production
draft    where ads are also available. we found that
the    overlap    is quite narrow, so we analyze 11 such
movies in our dataset. this way we end up with 50
movie scripts in total. we follow existing approaches
(cour et al. 2008; laptev et al. 2008) to automatically
align scripts to movies. first we parse the scripts, ex-
tending the method of (laptev et al. 2008) to handle
scripts which deviate from the default format. second,

5 www.makemkv.com/
6 www.xmedia-recode.de/
7 castingwords

http://castingwords.com/

transcription

service,

we extract video clips from the full movie based on the
aligned sentence intervals. we also uniformly extract
10 frames from each video clip. as discussed earlier,
ads and scripts describe activities, objects and scenes
(as well as emotions which we do not explicitly handle
with these features, but they might still be captured,
e.g. by the context or activities). in the following we
brie   y introduce the visual features computed on our
data which are publicly available10.

idt we extract the improved dense trajectories
compensated for camera motion (wang and schmid
2013). for each feature (trajectory, hog, hof, mbh)
we create a codebook with 4,000 clusters and compute
the corresponding histograms. we apply l1 normaliza-
tion to the obtained histograms and use them as fea-
tures.

lsda we use the recent large scale object detec-
tion id98 (ho   man et al. 2014) which distinguishes
7,604 id163 (deng et al. 2009) classes. we run the

8 http://www.weeklyscript.com,

http://www.simplyscripts.com, http://www.dailyscript.com,
http://www.imsdb.com

9 www.nikse.dk/subtitleedit/
10 mpii.de/movie-description

movie description

7

detector on every second extracted frame (due to com-
putational constraints). within each frame we max-
pool the network responses for all classes, then do mean-
pooling over the frames within a video clip and use the
result as a feature.

places and hybrid finally, we use the re-
cent scene classi   cation id98s (zhou et al. 2014) featur-
ing 205 scene classes. we use both available networks,
places-id98 and hybrid-id98, where the    rst is trained
on the places dataset (zhou et al. 2014) only, while the
second is additionally trained on the 1.2 million images
of id163 (ilsvrc 2012) (russakovsky et al. 2014).
we run the classi   ers on all the extracted frames of our
dataset. we mean-pool over the frames of each video
clip, using the result as a feature.

3.2 the montreal video annotation dataset (m-vad)

one of the main challenges in automating the construc-
tion of a video annotation dataset derived from ad au-
dio is accurately segmenting the ad output, which is
mixed with the original movie soundtrack. in this sec-
tion we describe our methods for ad narration isolation
and video alignment. ad narrations are typically care-
fully placed within key locations of a movie and edited
by a post-production supervisor for continuity. for ex-
ample, when a scene changes rapidly, the narrator will
speak multiple sentences without pauses. such content
should be kept together when describing that part of
the movie. if a scene changes slowly, the narrator will
instead describe the scene in one sentence, then pause
for a moment, and later continue the description. by de-
tecting those short pauses, we are able to align a movie
with video descriptions automatically.

in the following we detail our automatic approach
to ad segmentation (section 3.2.1). in section 3.2.2 we
discuss how to align ad to the video and obtain high
quality ad transcripts.

3.2.1 ad narrations segmentation using vocal isolation

despite the advantages o   ered by ad, creating a com-
pletely automated approach for extracting the relevant
narration or annotation from the audio track and re   n-
ing the alignment of the annotation with the scene still
poses some challenges. in the following, we discuss our
automatic solution for ad narrations segmentation. we
use two audio tracks included in dvds: 1) the standard
movie audio signal and 2) the standard movie audio
mixed with ad narrations signal.

vocal isolation techniques boost vocals, including
dialogues and ad narrations while suppressing back-
ground movie sound in stereo signals. this technique

is used widely in karaoke machines for stereo signals
to remove the vocal track by reversing the phase of
one channel to cancel out any signal perceived to come
from the center while leaving the signals that are per-
ceived as coming from the left or the right. the main
reason for using vocal isolation for ad segmentation is
based on the fact that ad narration is mixed in nat-
ural pauses in the dialogue. hence, ad narration can
only be present when there is no dialogue. in vocal iso-
lated signals, whenever the narrator speaks, the movie
signal is almost a    at line relative to the ad signal, al-
lowing us to cleanly separate the narration from other
dialogue by comparing the two signals. figure 4 illus-
trates an example from the movie    life of pi   , where in
the original movie soundtrack there are sounds of ocean
waves in the background.

our approach has three main steps. first we isolate
vocals, including dialogues and ad narrations. second,
we separate the ad narrations from dialogues. finally,
we apply a simple thresholding method to extract ad
segment audio tracks.

we isolate vocals using adobe audition   s center chan-

nel extractor11 implementation to boost ad narrations
and movie dialogues while suppressing movie background
sounds on both ad and movie audio signals. we align
the movie and ad audio signals by taking an fft of
the two audio signals, compute the cross-correlation,
measure similarity for di   erent o   sets and select the o   -
set which corresponds to peak cross-correlation. after
alignment, we apply least mean square (lms) noise
cancellation and subtract the ad mono squared signal
from the movie mono squared signal in order to sup-
press dialogue in the ad signal. for the majority of
movies on the market (among the 104 movies that we
purchased, 12 movies have been mixed to the center of
the audio signal, therefore we were not able to auto-
matically align them), applying lms results in cleaned
ad narrations for the ad audio signal. even in cases
where the shapes of the standard movie audio signal
and standard movie audio mixed with ad signal are
very di   erent - due to the ad mixing process - our
procedure is su   cient for the automatic segmentation
of ad narration.

finally, we extract the ad audio tracks by detect-
ing the beginning and end of ad narration segments
in the ad audio signal (i.e. where the narrator starts
and stops speaking) using a simple thresholding method
that we applied to all dvds without changing the thresh-
old value.

11 creative.adobe.com/products/audition

8

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

figure 4 ad dataset collection. from the movie    life of pi   . line 2 and 3: vocal isolation of movie and ad soundtrack.
second and third rows shows movie and ad audio signals after voice isolation. the two circles show the ad segments on the
ad mono channel track. a pause (   at signal) between two ad narration parts shows the natural ad narration segmentation
while the narrator stops and then continues describing the movie. we automatically segment ad audio based on these natural
pauses. at    rst row, you can also see the transcription related to    rst and second ad narration parts on top of second and
third image shots.

3.2.2 movie/ad alignment and professional
transcription

ad audio narration segments are time-stamped based
on our automatic ad narration segmentation. in order
to compensate for the potential 1-2 seconds misalign-
ment between the ad narrator speaking and the cor-
responding scene in the movie, we automatically added
two seconds to the end of each video clip. also we have
discard all the transcriptions related to movie introduc-
tion/ending which are located at the beginning and the
end of movies. unlike movie scripts, in ad less than
0.5% might be related to non-visual descriptions such
as a text message on a cellphone, or street name in the
movie, which we keep in our corpus.

in order to obtain high quality text descriptions, the
ad audio segments were transcribed with more than
98% transcription accuracy, using a professional tran-
scription service12. these services use a combination
of automatic id103 techniques and human
transcription to produce a high quality transcription.

12 transcribeme
http://transcribeme.com

professional

transcription,

our audio narration isolation technique allows us to
process the audio into small, well de   ned time segments
and reduce the overall transcription e   ort and cost.

3.3 the large scale movie description challenge
(lsmdc)

for our large scale movie description challenge (lsmdc),
we combined the m-vad and mpii-md datasets. we
   rst identi   ed the overlap between the two, so that the
same movie does not appear in the training and test
set of the joined dataset. we also excluded script-based
movie alignments from the validation and test sets of
mpii-md. the datasets were then joined by combining
the corresponding training, validation and test sets, see
table 1 for detailed statistics. the combined test set is
used as a public test set of the challenge. we addition-
ally added 20 more movies where we only released the
video clips, but not the aligned sentences. they form
the blind test set of the challenge and are only used
for evaluation. we rely on the respective best aspects
of m-vad and mpii-md for the public and blind test

movie description

9

unique
movies

words

sentences

clips

average
length, sec.

total
length, h.

mpii-md (ad)
mpii-md (movie script)
mpii-md (total)
m-vad (ad)

lsmdc training
lsmdc validation
lsmdc public test
lsmdc blind test
lsmdc (total)

55
50
94
92

153
12
17
20
202

330,086
317,728
647,814
502,926

913,841
63,789
87,147
83,766
1,148,543

37,272
31,103
68,375
55,904

91,941
6,542
10,053
9,578
118,114

37,266
31,071
68,337
46,589

91,908
6,542
10,053
9,578
118,081

4.2
3.9
4.1
6.2

4.9
5.2
4.2
4.5
4.8

(4.1)
(3.6)
(3.9)
-

(4.8)
(5.2)
(4.1)
(4.4)
(4.7)

44.0
33.8
77.8
84.6

124.9
9.5
11.6
12.0
158.0

(42.5)
(31.1)
(73.6)
-

(121.4)
(9.4)
(11.3)
(11.8)
(153.9)

table 1 movie description dataset statistics, see discussion in section 3.4.

dataset

vocab. nouns verbs adjec- adverbs

size

mpii-md
m-vad
lsmdc

10,558
18,871
17,609
9,512
23,442 12,983

2,933
2,571
3,461

tives

4,239
3,560
5,710

1,141
857
1,288

table 2 vocabulary and pos statistics (after word stem-
ming) for our movie description datasets, see discussion in
section 3.4.

sets: we provide blu-ray quality for them, use the au-
tomatic alignment and transcription described in sec-
tion 3.2 and clean them using a manual alignment as
in section 3.1.3. we are also in the process to manu-
ally align the m-vad validation and training sets and
will release them with blu-ray quality for lsmdc 2016.
we set up the evaluation server3 for the challenge using
the codalab13 platform. the challenge data is available
online2. we provide more information about the chal-
lenge setup and results in section 6.

video clips respectively. this split balances movie gen-
res within each set, which is motivated by the fact that
the vocabulary used to describe, say, an action movie
could be very di   erent from the vocabulary used in a
comedy movie.

table 2 illustrates the vocabulary size, number of
nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs in each respective
dataset. to compute the part of speech statistics for our
corpora we tag and stem all words in the datasets with
the standford part-of-speech (pos) tagger and stem-
mer toolbox (toutanova et al. 2003), then we compute
the frequency of stemmed words in the corpora. it is
important to notice that in our computation each word
and its variations in corpora is counted once since we
applied stemmer. interesting observation on statistics
is that e.g. the number of adjectives is larger than the
number of verbs, which shows that the ad is describ-
ing the characteristics of visual elements in the movie
in high detail.

3.4 movie description dataset statistics

table 1 presents statistics for the number of words, sen-
tences and clips in our movie description corpora. we
also report the average/total length of the annotated
time intervals. if the manually aligned video clip was
shorter than 2 seconds, we symmetrically expanded it
(from beginning and end) to be exactly 2 seconds long.
in the table we include both, the    nal as well as the orig-
inal (precise) clip length (in brackets). in total mpii-
md contains 68,337 clips and 68,375 sentences (some-
times multiple sentences migh refer to the same video
clip), while m-vad includes 46,589 clips and 55,904
sentences. our combined lsmdc dataset contains over
118k sentence-clips pairs and 158 hours of video.

for lsmdc the training/validation/public-/blind-
test split consist of 91,908, 6,542, 10,053 and 9,578

13 https://codalab.org/

3.5 comparison to other video description datasets

we compare our corpus to other existing parallel video
corpora in table 3. the main limitations of prior data-
sets include the coverage of a single domain (das et al.
2013; regneri et al. 2013; rohrbach et al. 2014) and
having a limited number of video clips (chen and dolan
2011). recently, two video description datasets have
been proposed, namely msr-vtt (xu et al. 2016) and
tgif (li et al. 2016). similar to msvd dataset (chen
and dolan 2011), msr-vtt is based on youtube clips.
while it has a large number of sentence descriptions
(200k) it is still rather small in terms of the number
of video clips (10k). tgif is a large dataset of 100k
image sequences (gifs) with associated descriptions.
both datasets are similar in that they represent web-
videos, while our proposed datasets focus on movies.

10

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

dataset

multi-sentence

domain

sentence source

videos

clips

sentences

youcook (das et al. 2013)
tacos (regneri et al. 2013)
tacos multi-level (rohrbach et al. 2014)
msvd (chen and dolan 2011)
tgif (li et al. 2016)
msr-vtt (xu et al. 2016)

m-vad (ours)
mpii-md (ours)
lsmdc (ours)

x
x
x

x
x
x

cooking
cooking
cooking
open
open
open

open
open
open

crowd
crowd
crowd
crowd
crowd
crowd

professional
professional
professional

88
127
185
-
-
7,180

92
94
202

-
7,206
14,105
1,970
100,000
10,000

48,986
68,337
118,081

2,668
18,227
52,593
70,028
125,781
200,000

55,904
68,375
118,114

table 3 comparison of video description datasets. discussion see section 3.5.

4 approaches for movie description

given a training corpus of aligned videos and sentences
we want to describe a new unseen test video. in this
section we discuss two approaches to the video descrip-
tion task that we benchmark on our proposed datasets.
our    rst approach in section 4.1 is based on the sta-
tistical machine translation (smt) approach of (rohr-
bach et al. 2013). our second approach (section 4.2)
learns to generate descriptions using long short-term
memory network (lstm). for the    rst step both ap-
proaches rely on visual classi   ers learned on annota-
tions (labels) extracted from natural language descrip-
tions using our semantic parser (section 4.1.1). while
the    rst approach does not di   erentiate which features
to use for di   erent labels, our second approach de   nes
di   erent semantic groups of labels and uses most rele-
vant visual features for each group. for this reason we
refer to this approach as visual-labels. in the second
step, the smt-based approach uses a crf to predict
single most likely tuple (subject, verb, object, loca-
tion) and translates it into a sentence. on the other
hand, the lstm-based approach takes the complete
score vectors from the classi   ers as input and gener-
ates a sentence based on them. figure 5 provides an
overview of the two discussed approaches.

4.1 id29 + smt

as our    rst approach we adapt the two-step transla-
tion approach of (rohrbach et al. 2013) which uses an
intermediate semantic representation (sr), modeled as
a tuple, e.g. (cid:104)cut, knif e, tomato(cid:105) and statistical ma-
chine translation (smt) (koehn et al. 2007) (see fig-
ure 5(a)). while we cannot rely on an annotated sr as
in (rohrbach et al. 2013), we automatically mine the
sr from sentences using id29 which we in-
troduce in this section.

phrase

id138 verbnet
mapping mapping

expected
frame

the man

man#1 agent.animate agent: man#1

begin
shoot

a video

to

shoot#4 shoot#vn#3 action:

shoot#4

video#1 patient.solid patient:
video#1

in

in

pp.in

the moving
bus

bus#1

np.location.
solid

location: mov-
ing bus#1

table 4 semantic parse for    he began to shoot a video in
the moving bus   . discussion see section 4.1.1

4.1.1 id29

learning from a parallel corpus of videos and natural
language sentences is challenging when no annotated
intermediate representation is available. in this section
we introduce our approach to exploit the sentences us-
ing id29. the proposed method extracts
intermediate semantic representations (srs) from the
natural sentences.

approach. we lift the words in a sentence to a semantic
space of roles and id138 (fellbaum 1998; pedersen
et al. 2004) senses by performing srl (semantic role
labeling) and wsd (id51). for
an example, refer to table 4, the expected outcome
of id29 on the input sentence    he shot a
video in the moving bus    is    agent: man, action: shoot,
patient: video, location: bus   . additionally, the role
   llers are disambiguated.

we use the clausie tool (del corro and gemulla

2013) to decompose sentences into their respective clauses.
for example,    he shot and modi   ed the video    is split
into two phrases    he shot the video    and    he modi   ed
the video   ). we then use the opennlp tool suite14 for
chunking the text of each clause. in order to provide the
linking of words in the sentence to their id138 sense

14 http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/

movie description

11

figure 5 overview of our movie description approaches: (a) smt-based approach, adapted from (rohrbach et al. 2013); (b)
our proposed lstm-based approach.

mappings, we rely on a state-of-the-art wsd system,
ims (zhong and ng 2010). the wsd system, however,
works at a word level. we enable it to work at a phrase
level. for every noun phrase, we identify and disam-
biguate its head word (e.g. the moving bus to    bus#1    ,
where    bus#1     refers to the    rst sense of the word bus).
we link verb phrases to the proper sense of its head
word in id138 (e.g. begin to shoot to    shoot#4    ).
the phrasal verbs such as e.g.    pick up    or    turn o       
are preserved as long as they exist in id138.

in order to obtain word role labels, we link verbs
to verbnet (kipper et al. 2006; schuler et al. 2009),
a manually curated high-quality linguistic resource for
english verbs. verbnet is already mapped to word-
net, thus we map to verbnet via id138. we per-
form two levels of matches in order to obtain role labels.
first is the syntactic match. every verbnet verb sense
comes with a syntactic frame e.g. for shoot, the syn-
tactic frame is np v np. we    rst match the sentence   s
verb against the verbnet frames. these become candi-
dates for the next step. second we perform the seman-
tic match: verbnet also provides a role restriction on
the arguments of the roles e.g. for shoot (sense killing),
the role restriction is agent.animate v patient.animate
pp instrument.solid. for the other sense for shoot (sense
snap), the semantic restriction is agent.animate v
patient.solid. we only accept candidates from the syn-
tactic match that satisfy the semantic restriction.

semantic representation. verbnet contains over 20 roles
and not all of them are general or can be recognized
reliably. therefore, we group them to get the sub-
ject, verb, object and location roles. we
explore two approaches to obtain the labels based on
the output of the semantic parser. first is to use the
extracted text chunks directly as labels. second is to
use the corresponding senses as labels (and therefore
group multiple text labels). in the following we refer

to these as text- and sense-labels. thus from each sen-
tence we extract a semantic representation in a form of
(subject, verb, object, location).

4.1.2 smt

for the sentence generation we build on the two-step
translation approach of (rohrbach et al. 2013). as the
   rst step it learns a mapping from the visual input
to the semantic representation (sr), modeling pairwise
dependencies in a crf using visual classi   ers as unar-
ies. the unaries are trained using an id166 on dense tra-
jectories (wang and schmid 2013). in the second step
it translates the sr to a sentence using statistical ma-
chine translation (smt) (koehn et al. 2007). for this
the approach uses a concatenated sr as input language,
e.g. cut knife tomato, and natural sentence as output
language, e.g. the person slices the tomato. we obtain
the sr automatically from the semantic parser, as de-
scribed above, section 4.1.1. in addition to dense tra-
jectories we use the features described in section 3.1.4.

4.2 visual labels + lstm

next we present our two-step lstm-based approach.
the    rst step performs visual recognition using the
visual classi   ers which we train according to labels   
semantics and    visuality   . the second step generates
textual descriptions using an lstm network (see fig-
ure 5(b)). we explore various design choices for building
and training the lstm.

4.2.1 robust visual classi   ers

for training we rely on a parallel corpus of videos and
weak sentence annotations. as before (see section 4.1)
we parse the sentences to obtain a set of labels (single

visualfeaturessomeoneenterdoorroomsubjectlocationverbobjectcrfclassifier scoressmtsomeone enters the room.smt-basedplaces-id98lsdaidtplaces class. scoresobject class. scoresverb class. scoreslstm-basedselect robust classifierslstmconcatconcatconcatsomeoneentersthelstmlstmconcatroomlstmwavetake offpunchdancegiveopengrabclimbdrinkenterfallget outdrive offjumpeat(a)(b)12

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

figure 6 (a-c) lstm architectures. (d) variants of placing the dropout layer.

words or short phrases, e.g. look up) to train visual
classi   ers. however, this time we aim to select the most
visual labels which can be robustly recognized. in order
to do that we take three steps.

avoiding parser failure. not all sentences can be parsed
successfully, as e.g. some sentences are incomplete or
grammatically incorrect. to avoid loosing the potential
labels in these sentences, we match our set of initial la-
bels to the sentences which the parser failed to process.

semantic groups. our labels correspond to di   erent se-
mantic groups. in this work we consider three most im-
portant groups: verbs, objects and places. we propose
to treat each label group independently. first, we rely
on a di   erent representation for each semantic group,
which is targeted to the speci   c group. namely we use
the activity recognition features improved dense tra-
jectories (dt) for verbs, lsda scores for objects and
places-id98 scores for places. second, we train one-
vs-all id166 classi   ers for each group separately. the in-
tuition behind this is to avoid    wrong negatives    (e.g.
using object    bed    as negative for place    bedroom   ).

visual labels. now, how do we select visual labels for
our semantic groups? in order to    nd the verbs among
the labels we rely on our semantic parser (section 4.1.1).
next, we look up the list of    places    used in (zhou et al.
2014) and search for corresponding words among our
labels. we look up the object classes used in (ho   man
et al. 2014) and search for these    objects   , as well as
their base forms (e.g.    domestic cat    and    cat   ). we
discard all the labels that do not belong to any of our
three groups of interest as we assume that they are
likely not visual and thus are di   cult to recognize. fi-
nally, we discard labels which the classi   ers could not
learn reliably, as these are likely noisy or not visual.
for this we require the classi   ers to have certain min-
imum area under the roc-curve (receiver operating
characteristic).

4.2.2 lstm for sentence generation

we rely on the basic lstm architecture proposed in
(donahue et al. 2015) for video description. at each
time step an lstm generates a word and receives the
visual classi   ers (input-vis) as well as as the previous
generated word (input-lang) as input (see figure 6(a)).
we encode each word with a one-hot-vector according
to its index in a dictionary and project it in a lower di-
mensional embedding. the embedding is jointly learned
during training of the lstm. we feed in the classi   er
scores as input to the lstm which is equivalent to the
best variant proposed in (donahue et al. 2015). we an-
alyze the following aspects for this architecture:

layer structure. we compare a 1-layer architecture with
a 2-layer architecture. in the 2-layer architecture, the
output of the    rst layer is used as input for the second
layer (figure 6b) and was used by (donahue et al. 2015)
for video description. additionally we also compare to
a 2-layer factored architecture of (donahue et al. 2015),
where the    rst layer only gets the language as input and
the second layer gets the output of the    rst as well as
the visual input.

dropout placement. to learn a more robust network
which is less likely to over   t we rely on a dropout (hin-
ton et al. 2012), i.e. a ratio r of randomly selected units
is set to 0 during training (while all others are mul-
tiplied with 1/r). we explore di   erent ways to place
dropout in the network, i.e. either for language input
(lang-drop) or visual (vis-drop) input only, for both in-
puts (concat-drop) or for the lstm output (lstm-drop),
see figure 6(d).

5 evaluation

in this section we provide more insights about our movie
description datasets. first we compare ads to movie
scripts and then benchmark the approaches to video

lstm lstm lstm input-lang input-vis input-lang input-vis input-lang input-vis 1 layer lstm lstm lstm input-lang input-vis input-lang input-vis input-lang input-vis lstm lstm lstm 2 layers unfactored lstm lstm lstm input-lang input-vis input-lang input-vis input-lang input-vis lstm lstm lstm 2 layers factored (b) (d) input-vis input-lang concat lang-drop vis-drop concat-drop lstm lstm-drop dropouts (a) (c) movie description

13

correctness

relevance

corpus

clause nlp roles wsd

movie scripts
ads

33.9 (11.2)
66.1 (35.7)

33.4 (16.8 )
66.6 (44.9 )

table 5 human evaluation of movie scripts and ads: which
sentence is more correct/relevant with respect to the video
(forced choice). majority vote of 5 judges in %. in brackets:
at least 4 of 5 judges agree. see also section 5.1.

description introduced in section 4 as well as other re-
lated work.

5.1 comparison of ad vs script data

we compare the ad and script data using 11 movies
from the mpii-md dataset where both are available
(see section 3.1.2). for these movies we select the over-
lapping time intervals with an intersection over union
overlap of at least 75%, which results in 279 sentence
pairs, we remove 2 pairs which have idendical sentences.
we ask humans via amazon mechanical turk (amt)
to compare the sentences with respect to their correct-
ness and relevance to the video, using both video in-
tervals as a reference (one at a time). each task was
completed by 5 di   erent human subjects, covering 2770
tasks done in total. table 5 presents the results of this
evaluation. ad is ranked as more correct and relevant
in about 2/3 of the cases, which supports our intuition
that scrips contain mistakes and irrelevant content even
after being cleaned up and manually aligned.

5.2 semantic parser evaluation

table 6 reports the accuracy of individual components
of the id29 pipeline. the components are
clause splitting (clause), id52 and chunking
(nlp), id14 (roles) and word sense
disambiguation (wsd). we manually evaluate the cor-
rectness on a randomly sampled set of sentences using
human judges. it is evident that the poorest perform-
ing parts are the nlp and the wsd components. some
of the nlp mistakes arise due to incorrect pos tag-
ging. wsd is considered a hard problem and when the
dataset contains less frequent words, the performance
is severely a   ected.

mpii-md 0.89

0.62

0.86

0.7

table 6 semantic parser accuracy on mpii-md. discussion
in section 5.2.

5.3.1 automatic metrics

for automatic evaluation we rely on the ms coco
caption evaluation api15. the automatic evaluation
measures include id7-1,-2,-3,-4 (papineni et al. 2002),
meteor (denkowski and lavie 2014), id8-l (lin
2004), and cider (vedantam et al. 2015). while we re-
port all measures for the    nal evaluation in the lsmdc
(section 6), we focus our discussion on meteor score
in the preliminary evaluations in this section. accord-
ing to (elliott and keller 2013; vedantam et al. 2015),
meteor supersedes previously used measures such as
id7 or id8 in terms of agreement with human
judgments. meteor also outperforms cider when
the number of references is small and in the case of the
movie description data we have only a single reference.

5.3.2 human evaluation

for the human evaluation we rely on a ranking ap-
proach, i.e. human judges are given multiple descrip-
tions from di   erent systems, and are asked to rank them
with respect to the following criteria: correctness, rele-
vance, and grammar, motivated by prior work rohr-
bach et al. (2013) and on the other hand we asked
human judges to rank sentences for    how helpful they
would be for a blind person to understand what is hap-
pening in the movie   . the amt workers are given ran-
domized sentences, and, in addition to some general
instruction, the following de   nitions:

grammar.    rank grammatical correctness of sentences:
judge the    uency and readability of the sentence (inde-
pendently of the correctness with respect to the video).   

correctness.    rank correctness of sentences: for which
sentence is the content more correct with respect to the
video (independent if it is complete, i.e. describes every-
thing), independent of the grammatical correctness.   

5.3 id74 for description

in this section we describe how we evaluate the gener-
ated descriptions using automatic and human evalua-
tion.

relevance.    rank relevance of sentences: which sen-
tence contains the more salient (i.e. relevant, impor-
tant) events/objects of the video?   

15 https://github.com/tylin/coco-caption

14

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

meteor

5.4.2 visual labels + lstm

smt with our sense-labels
4.93
idt 30
idt 100
5.12
5.19
combi 100

smt with our text-labels
idt 30
idt 100
combi 100

5.59
5.51
5.42

table 7 video description performance of di   erent smt
versions on mpii-md. discussion in section 5.4.1.

helpful for the blind. in the lsmdc evaluation we in-
troduced a new measure, which should capture how use-
ful a description would be for blind people:

   rank the sentences according to how useful they
would be for a blind person which would like to under-
stand/follow the movie without seeing it.   

5.4 movie description evaluation

as the collected text data comes from the movie con-
text, it contains a lot of information speci   c to the
plot, such as names of the characters. we pre-process
each sentence in the corpus, transforming the names to
   someone    or    people    (in case of plural).

we    rst analyze the performance of the proposed
approaches on the mpii-md dataset, and then evalu-
ate the best version on the m-vad dataset. for mpii-
md we split the 11 movies with associated scripts and
ads (in total 22 alignments, see section 3.1.2) into val-
idation set (8) and test set (14). the other 83 movies
are used for training. on m-vad we use 10 movies for
testing, 10 for validation and 72 for training.

5.4.1 id29 + smt

table 7 summarizes results of multiple variants of the
smt approach when using the sr from our semantic
parser.    combi    refers to combining idt, hybrid,
and places as unaries in the crf. we did not add
lsda as we found that it reduces the performance of
the crf. after extracting the labels we select the ones
which appear at least 30 or 100 times as our visual at-
tributes. overall, we observe similar performance in all
cases, with slightly better results for text-labels than
sense-labels. this can be attributed to sense disam-
biguation errors of the semantic parser. in the following
we use the    idt 30    model, which achieves the highest
score of 5.59, and denote it as    smt-best   16.

16 we also evaluated the    id29+smt    ap-
proach on a corpus where annotated srs are available,

we start with exploring di   erent design choices of our
approach. we build on the labels discovered by the se-
mantic parser. to learn classi   ers we select the labels
that appear at least 30 times, resulting in 1,263 labels.
the parser additionally tells us whether the label is a
verb. the lstm output/hidden unit as well as memory
cell have each 500 dimensions.

robust visual classi   ers. we    rst analyze our proposal
to consider groups of labels to learn di   erent classi-
   ers and also to use di   erent visual representations for
these groups (see section 4.2). in table 8 we evaluate
our generated sentences using di   erent input features
to the lstm on the validation set of mpii-md. in our
baseline, in the top part of table 8, we use the same
visual descriptors for all labels. the places feature
is best with 7.10 meteor. combination by stacking
all features (idt + lsda + places) improves fur-
ther to 7.24 meteor. the second part of the table
demonstrates the e   ect of introducing di   erent seman-
tic label groups. we    rst split the labels into    verbs   
and all others. given that some labels appear in both
roles, the total number of labels increases to 1328 (line
5). we compare two settings of training the classi   ers:
   retrieved    (we retrieve the classi   er scores from the
classi   ers trained in the previous step),    trained    (we
train the id166s speci   cally for each label type, e.g.
   verbs   ). next, we further divide the non-   verb    la-
bels into    places    and    others   (line 6), and    nally into
   places    and    objects   (line 7). we discard the unused
labels and end up with 913 labels. out of these labels,
we select the labels where the classi   er obtains a roc
higher or equal to 0.7 (threshold selected on the val-
idation set). after this we obtain 263 labels and the
best performance in the    trained    setting (line 8). to
support our intuition about the importance of the label
discrimination (i.e. using di   erent features for di   erent
semantic groups of labels), we propose another baseline
(line 9). here we use the same set of 263 labels but pro-
vide the same feature for all of them, namely the best
performing combination idt + lsda + places. as
we see, this results in an inferior performance.

we make several observations from table 8 which
lead to robust visual classi   ers from the weak sentence
annotations. a) it is bene   cial to select features based
on the label semantics. b) training one-vs-all id166s for
speci   c label groups consistently improves the perfor-
mance as it avoids    wrong    negatives. c) focusing on

namely tacos multi-level (rohrbach et al. 2014), and
showed the comparable performance to manually annotated
srs, see (rohrbach et al. 2015c).

movie description

15

approach

labels retrieved

classi   ers (meteor in %)
trained

baseline: all labels treated the same way
(1) idt
(2) lsda
(3) places
(4) idt+lsda+places
visual labels
(5) verbs(idt), others(lsda)
(6) verbs(idt), places(places), others(lsda)
(7) verbs(idt), places(places), objects(lsda)
(8) + restriction to labels with roc     0.7
baseline: all labels treated the same way, labels from (8)
(9) idt+lsda+places

1328
1328
913
263

1263
1263
1263
1263

263

-
-
-
-

7.08
7.09
7.10
7.41

7.16

6.73
7.07
7.10
7.24

7.27
7.39
7.48
7.54

7.20

table 8 comparison of di   erent choices of labels and visual classi   ers. all results reported on the validation set of mpii-md.
for discussion see section 5.4.2.

architecture

m et eor

1 layer
2 layers unfact.
2 layers fact.

7.54
7.54
7.41

(a)

dropout

m et eor

no dropout
lang-drop
vis-drop
concat-drop
lstm-drop

(b)

7.19
7.13
7.34
7.29
7.54

dropout ratio m et eor

r=0.1
r=0.25
r=0.5
r=0.75

(c)

7.22
7.42
7.54
7.46

lstm architectures (lstm-drop 0.5) dropout strategies (1-layer, dropout 0.5) dropout ratios (1-layer,lstm-drop)

table 9 lstm architectures, mpii-md val set. labels, classi   ers as table 8, line (8). for discussion see section 5.4.2.

more    visual    labels helps: we reduce the lstm input
dimensionality to 263 while improving the performance.

lstm architectures. now, as described in section 4.2.2,
we look at di   erent lstm architectures and training
con   gurations. in the following we use the best per-
forming    visual labels    approach, table 8, line (8).

we start with examining the architecture, where we
explore di   erent con   gurations of lstm and dropout
layers. table 9(a) shows the performance of three dif-
ferent networks:    1 layer   ,    2 layers unfactored    and    2
layers factored    introduced in section 4.2.2. as we see,
the    1 layer    and    2 layers unfactored    perform equally
well, while    2 layers factored    is inferior to them. in the
following experiments we use the simpler    1 layer    net-
work. we then compare di   erent dropout placements
as illustrated in (table 9(b)). we obtain the best result
when applying dropout after the lstm layer (   lstm-
drop   ), while having no dropout or applying it only to
language leads to stronger over-   tting to the visual fea-
tures. putting dropout after the lstm (and prior to
a    nal prediction layer) makes the entire system more
robust. as for the best dropout ratio, we    nd that 0.5
works best with lstm-dropout (table 9(c)).

in most of the experiments we trained our networks
for 25,000 iterations. after looking at the meteor

scores for intermediate iterations we found that at iter-
ation 15,000 we achieve best performance overall. addi-
tionally we train multiple lstms with di   erent random
orderings of the training data. in our experiments we
combine three in an ensemble, averaging the resulting
word predictions.

to summarize, the most important aspects that de-
crease over-   tting and lead to better sentence genera-
tion are: (a) a correct learning rate and step size, (b)
dropout after the lstm layer, (c) choosing the train-
ing iteration based on meteor score as opposed to
only looking at the lstm accuracy/loss which can be
misleading, and (d) building ensembles of multiple net-
works with di   erent random initializations17.

5.4.3 comparison to related work

experimental setup. in this section we evaluate on the
test set of the mpii-md dataset (6,578 clips) and m-
vad dataset (4,951 clips). we use meteor for auto-
matic evaluation and we perform a human evaluation
on a random subset of 1,300 video clips, see section 5.3
for details. we train our method on m-vad and use the
same lstm architecture and parameters as for mpii-

17 more details can be found in our corresponding arxiv
version rohrbach et al. (2015a)

16

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

approach

nn baselines

idt
lsda
places
hybrid

smt-best (ours)
s2vt
visual-labels (ours)

nn upperbound

m et eor

human evaluation: rank

in %

correct. grammar relev.

4.87
4.45
4.28
4.34

5.59
6.27
7.03

19.43

-
-
-
-

2.11
2.02
1.87

-

-
-
-
-

2.39
1.67
1.94

-

-
-
-
-

2.08
2.06
1.86

-

m et eor

approach

temporal attention
s2vt
visual-labels (ours)

in %

4.33
5.62
6.36

table 10 comparison of our proposed methods to prior work: s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015a), temporal attention (yao
et al. 2015). human eval ranked 1 to 3, lower is better. for discussion see section 5.4.3.

(a) test set of mpii-md.

(b) test set of m-vad.

approach

sentence

smt-best (ours)
s2vt
visual-labels (ours) someone is standing in the crowd,

someone is a man, someone is a man.
someone looks at him, someone turns to someone.

reference

a little man with a little smile.
someone, back in elf guise, is trying to calm the kids.

the car is a water of the water.
smt-best (ours)
s2vt
on the door, opens the door opens.
visual-labels (ours) the fellowship are in the courtyard.
reference

they cross the quadrangle below and run along the cloister.

smt-best (ours)

someone is down the door,
someone is a back of the door, and someone is a door.
someone shakes his head and looks at someone.

s2vt
visual-labels (ours) someone takes a drink and pours it into the water.
reference

someone grabs a vodka bottle standing open on the counter
and liberally pours some on the hand.

figure 7 qualitative comparison of our proposed methods to prior work: s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015a). examples from
the test set of mpii-md. visual-labels identi   es activities, objects, and places better than the other two methods. see
section 5.4.3.

md, but select the number of iterations on the m-vad
validation set.

results on mpii-md. table 10(a) summarizes the re-
sults on the test set of mpii-md. here we additionally
include the results from a nearest neighbor baseline,
i.e. we retrieve the closest sentence from the training
corpus using l1-normalized visual features and the in-
tersection distance. when comparing the di   erent fea-
tures (introduced in section 3.1.4), we see that the pre-
trained features (lsda, places, hybrid) perform
better than idt, with hybrid performing best. our
smt-best approach clearly improves over the nearest
neighbor baselines. with our visual-labels approach
we again signi   cantly improve the performance, specif-
ically by 1.44 meteor points. moreover, we improve
over the recent approach of (venugopalan et al. 2015a),

which also uses an lstm to generate video descrip-
tions. exploring di   erent strategies to label selection
and classi   er training, as well as various lstm con-
   gurations allows to obtain better result than prior on
the mpii-md dataset. human evaluation mainly agrees
with the automatic measure. visual-labels outperforms
both other methods in terms of correctness and rel-
evance, however it loses to s2vt in terms of gram-
mar. this is due to the fact that s2vt produces overall
shorter (7.4 versus 8.7 words per sentence) and simpler
sentences, while our system generates longer sentences
and therefore has higher chances to make mistakes. we
also propose a retrieval upperbound. for every test sen-
tence we retrieve the closest training sentence according
to the meteor score. the rather low meteor score
of 19.43 re   ects the di   culty of the dataset. we show
some qualitative results in figure 7.

movie description

17

figure 8 average meteor score for id138 verb topics. selected sentences with single verb, number of sentences in
brackets. for discussion see section 5.5.2.

5.5.1 di   culty versus performance

as the    rst study we suggest to sort the test reference
sentences by di   culty, where di   culty is de   ned in mul-
tiple ways17.

sentence length and word frequency. some of the in-
tuitive sentence di   culty measures are its length and
average frequency of its words. when sorting the data
by di   culty (increasing sentence length or decreasing
average word frequency), we    nd that all three methods
have the same tendency to obtain lower meteor score
as the di   culty increases. figure 9(a) shows the perfor-
mance of compared methods w.r.t. the sentence length.
for the word frequency the correlation is even stronger,
see figure 9(b). visual-labels consistently outperforms
the other two methods, most notable as the di   culty
increases.

5.5.2 semantic analysis

id138 verb topics. next we analyze the test refer-
ence sentences w.r.t. verb semantics. we rely on word-
net topics (high level entries in the id138 ontology),
e.g.    motion   ,    perception   , de   ned for most synsets
in id138 (fellbaum 1998). sense information comes
from our automatic semantic parser, thus it might be
noisy. we showcase the 3 most frequent verbs for each
topic in table 11. we select sentences with a single
verb, group them according to the verb topic and com-
pute an average meteor score for each topic, see fig-
ure 8. we    nd that visual-labels is best for all topics
except    communication   , where smt-best wins. the
most frequent verbs there are    look up    and    nod   ,

(a) sentence length

(b) word frequency

figure 9 y-axis: meteor score per sentence. x-axis:
mpii-md test sentences 1 to 6,578 sorted by (a) length (in-
creasing); (b) word frequency (decreasing). shown values are
smoothed with a mean    lter of size 500. for discussion see
section 5.5.1.

results on m-vad. table 10(b) shows the results on
the test set of m-vad dataset. our visual-labels method
outperforms s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015a) and tem-
poral attention (yao et al. 2015) in meteor score. as
we see, the results agree with table 10(a), but are con-
sistently lower, suggesting that m-vad is more chal-
lenging than mpii-md. we attribute this to more pre-
cise manual alignments of the mpii-md dataset.

5.5 movie description analysis

despite the recent advances in the video description
task, the performance on the movie description datasets
(mpii-md and m-vad) remains rather low. in this
section we want to look closer at three methods, smt-
best, s2vt and visual-labels, in order to understand
where these methods succeed and where they fail. in the
following we evaluate all three methods on the mpii-
md test set.

02468101214motion (960)contact (562)perception (492)stative (346)change (235)communication (197)body (192)social (139)cognition (120)possession (101)none (80)competition (54)creation (47)consumption (33)emotion (29)weather (7)meteor  smt   bests2vtvisual   labels1000200030004000500060000246810121416<   short        sentences          long   >meteor  smt   bests2vtvisual   labels1000200030004000500060000246810121416<   easy         sentences       difficult   >meteor  smt   bests2vtvisual   labels18

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

approach

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015b)
frame-video-concept fusion (shetty and laaksonen 2015)
temporal attention (yao et al. 2015)

1

16.1
17.4
11.0
5.6

2

5.2
5.3
3.4
1.5

3

2.1
1.8
1.3
0.6

4

0.9
0.7
0.6
0.3

7.1
7.0
6.1
5.2

16.4
16.1
15.6
13.4

11.2
9.1
9.0
6.2

id7

meteor id8 cider

table 12 automatic evaluation on the blind test set of the lsmdc, in %. for discussion see section 6.1.

approach

correctness grammar relevance helpful for blind

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015b)
frame-video-concept fusion (shetty and laaksonen 2015)
temporal attention (yao et al. 2015)
reference

3.32
3.55
3.10
3.14
1.88

3.37
3.09
2.70
2.71
3.13

3.32
3.53
3.29
3.31
1.56

3.26
3.42
3.29
3.36
1.57

table 13 human evaluation on the blind test set of the lsmdc. human eval ranked 1 to 5, lower is better. for discussion
see section 6.1.

topic

id178

top-1

top-2

top-3

motion
contact
perception
stative
change
communication
body
social
cognition
possession
none
creation
competition
consumption
emotion
weather

7.05
7.10
4.83
4.84
6.92
6.73
5.04
6.11
5.21
5.29
5.04
5.69
5.19
4.52
6.19
3.93

turn
open
look
be
reveal
look up
smile
watch
look at
give
throw
hit
drive
use
draw
shine

walk
sit
stare
follow
start
nod
wear
join
see
take
hold
make
walk over
drink
startle
blaze

shake
stand
see
stop
emerge
face
dress
do
read
have
   y
do
point
eat
feel
light up

table 11 id178 and top 3 frequent verbs of each id138
topic. for discussion see section 5.5.2.

10 mention unusual words (speci   c to the movie), 24
have no subject, 29 have a non-human subject. this
leads to a lower performance, in particular, as most
training sentences contain    someone    as subject and
generated sentences are biased towards it.

summary. a) the test reference sentences that men-
tion verbs like    look    get higher scores due to their high
frequency in the dataset. b) the sentences with more
   visual    verbs tend to get higher scores. c) the sen-
tences without verbs (e.g. describing a scene), without
subjects or with non-human subjects get lower scores,
which can be explained by dataset biases.

which are also frequent in the dataset and in the sen-
tences produced by smt-best. the best performing
topic,    cognition   , is highly biased to    look at    verb.
the most frequent topics,    motion    and    contact   ,
which are also visual (e.g.    turn   ,    walk   ,    sit   ), are
nevertheless quite challenging, which we attribute to
their high diversity (see their id178 w.r.t. di   erent
verbs and their frequencies in table 11). topics with
more abstract verbs (e.g.    be   ,    have   ,    start   ) get
lower scores.

top 100 best and worst sentences. we look at 100 test
reference sentences, where visual-labels obtains high-
est and lowest meteor scores. out of 100 best sen-
tences 44 contain the verb    look    (including phrases
such as    look at   ). the other frequent verbs are    walk   ,
   turn   ,    smile   ,    nod   ,    shake   , i.e. mainly visual verbs.
overall the sentences are simple. among the worst 100
sentences we observe more diversity: 12 contain no verb,

6 the large scale movie description challenge
2015

the large scale movie description challenge (lsmdc)
was held in conjunction with iccv 2015. for the au-
tomatic evaluation we set up an evaluation server3.
during the    rst phase of the challenge the participants
could evaluate the outputs of their system on the pub-
lic test set of lsmdc dataset. in the second phase
of the challenge the participants were provided with
the videos from the blind test set (without textual de-
scriptions). these were used for the    nal evaluation.
to measure performance of the competing approaches
we performed both automatic and human evaluation
as described in section 5.3. the submission format was
similar to the ms coco challenge (chen et al. 2015)
and we also used the identical automatic evaluation
protocol. the challenge winner was determined based
on the human evaluation. the human evaluation was

movie description

approach

avg. sentence vocabulary
size

length

number of
unique sentences

% novel
sentences

19

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015b)
frame-video-concept fusion (shetty and laaksonen 2015)
temporal attention (yao et al. 2015)
reference

7.47
8.77
5.16
3.63
8.74

525
663
401
117
6,303

4,320
2,890
871
133
9,309

67.63
72.61
33.62
7.36
93.49

table 14 description statistics for di   erent methods and reference sentences on the blind test set of the lsmdc. for
discussion see section 6.1.

approach

sentence

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone lies on the bed.
temporal attention
reference

someone lies on the bed.
someone lies asleep on his bed.

someone lies in bed.
someone lies on her side facing her new friend.

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone sits at the table.
temporal attention
reference

someone sits down.
someone sits on the couch and looks at the tv.

someone looks at someone.
someone takes a seat and someone moves to the stove.

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone walks up to the house.
temporal attention
reference

someone walks to the front of the house.
someone looks at the house.

someone looks at someone.
someone sets down his young daughter then moves to a small wooden table.

someone turns to someone.
visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
someone looks at someone.
frame-video-concept fusion someone turns to someone.
temporal attention
reference

someone stands alone.
someone dashes for the staircase.

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone looks up at the ceiling.
temporal attention
reference

someone takes a deep breath and takes a deep breath.
someone looks at someone and looks at him.

someone stares at someone.
someone digs out her phone again, eyes the display, and answers the call.

figure 10 qualitative comparison of our approach visual-labels, s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015b), frame-video-concept
fusion (shetty and laaksonen 2015) and temporal attention (yao et al. 2015) on the blind test set of the lsmdc. discussion
see section 6.2.

performed over 1,200 randomly selected clips from the
blind test set of lsmdc.

6.1 lsmdc quantitative results

reason for this drop in the automatic measures is the
sentence length, which is much smaller for frame-video-
concept fusion and temporal attention compared to
the reference sentences, as we discuss in more details
below (see also table 14).

we received 4 submissions to the challenge, including
our visual-labels approach. the other submissions are
s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015b), temporal attention
(yao et al. 2015) and frame-video-concept fusion (shetty
and laaksonen 2015). we    rst look at the results of the
automatic evaluation on the blind test set of lsmdc
in table 12. as we can see the visual-labels approach
obtains highest scores in all evaluation measures ex-
cept id7-1,-2 where s2vt gets highest score. while
visual-labels get 7.1 meteor and s2vt 7.0 me-
teor, frame-video-concept fusion drops to 6.1 me-
teor and temporal attention to 5.2 meteor. one

next, we look at the results of human evaluation in
table 13. as known from literature (chen et al. 2015;
elliott and keller 2013; vedantam et al. 2015), auto-
matic evaluation measures do not always agree with
the human evaluation. here we see that human judges
prefer the descriptions from frame-video-concept fu-
sion approach in terms of correctness, grammar and
relevance. in our alternative evaluation, in terms of be-
ing helpful for the blind, visual-labels wins. possible
explanation for it is that in this evaluation criteria hu-
man judges penalized less the errors in the descriptions
but rather looked at their overall informativeness. in

20

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

approach

sentence

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone looks at someone.
temporal attention
reference

someone gets up.
later, someone sits with someone and someone.

someone takes a seat on the table and takes a seat on his desk.
someone looks at someone and smiles.

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone walks up to the front door.
temporal attention
reference

someone gets out of the car and walks o   .
someone walks up to the front of the house.

someone gets out of the car.
now someone steps out of the carriage with his new employers.

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone walks away.
temporal attention
reference

someone gets out of the car.
the trio starts across a bustling courtyard.

someone walks up to the street, and someone is walking to the other side of.
someone walks over to the table and looks at the other side of the house.

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone sits up.
temporal attention
reference

someone sips his drink.
someone sits at the table and looks at someone.

someone looks at someone.
as the men drink red wine, someone and someone watch someone take a sip.

visual-labels (ours)
s2vt
frame-video-concept fusion someone looks at someone.
someone looks at someone.
temporal attention
reference
someone tops o    someone   s glass.

someone takes a bite.
someone sits at the table.

figure 11 qualitative comparison of our approach visual-labels, s2vt (venugopalan et al. 2015b), frame-video-concept
fusion (shetty and laaksonen 2015) and temporal attention (yao et al. 2015) on 5 consecutive clips from the blind test set
of the lsmdc. discussion see section 6.2.

general, the gap between di   erent approaches is not
large. based on the human evaluation the winner of
the challenge is frame-video-concept fusion approach
of shetty and laaksonen (2015).

we closer analyze the outputs of the compared ap-
proaches in table 14, providing detailed statistics over
the generated descriptions. with respect to the sentence
length, visual-labels and s2vt demonstrate similar
properties to the reference descriptions, while the ap-
proaches frame-video-concept fusion and temporal
attention generate much shorter sentences (5.16 and
3.63 words on average vs. 8.74 of the references). in
terms of vocabulary size all approaches fall far below
the reference descriptions. this large gap indicates a
problem in that all the compared approaches focus on
a rather small set of visual and language concepts, ig-
noring a long tail in the distribution. the number of
unique sentences con   rms the previous    nding, showing
slightly higher numbers for visual-labels and s2vt,
while the other two tend to frequently generate the
same description for di   erent clips. finally, the percent-
age of novel sentences (not present among the train-
ing descriptions) highlights another aspect, namely the
amount of novel vs. retrieved descriptions. as we see,
all the methods    retrieve    some amount of descriptions
from training data, while the approach temporal at-
tention produces only 7.36% novel sentences.

6.2 lsmdc qualitative results

figure 10 shows qualitative results from the competing
approaches. the    rst two examples are success cases,
where most of the approaches are able to describe the
video correctly. the third example is an interesting
case where visually relevant descriptions, provided by
most approaches, do not match the reference descrip-
tion, which focuses on an action happening in the back-
ground of the scene (   someone sets down his young
daughter then moves to a small wooden table.   ). the
last two rows contain partial and complete failures. in
one all approaches fail to recognize the person running
away, only capturing the    turning    action which in-
deed happened before running. in the other one, all
approaches fail to recognize that the woman interacts
with the small object (phone).

figure 11 further compares all approaches on a se-
quence of 5 consecutive clips. we can make the follow-
ing observations from these examples. indeed visual-
labels and s2vt produce longer and noisier descrip-
tions. sometimes, though, visual-labels is able to cap-
ture important details, such as    someone sips his drink   ,
which the other methods fail to recognize. descriptions
produced by frame-video-concept fusion and tempo-
ral attention are short and cleaner, also temporal at-
tention tends to produce generally applicable sentences,
e.g.    someone looks at someone   .

movie description

6.3 lsmdc summary

we make the following conclusions from the presented
results. (1) visual-labels and s2vt tend to generate
longer, more diverse and novel descriptions, which leads
to lower human rankings, due to higher error chances.
(2) temporal attention and frame-video-concept fu-
sion produce shorter and simpler descriptions and re-
trieve more from training data, and thus obtain bet-
ter human rankings. (3) frame-video-concept fusion
lands in the    sweet spot   , in terms of sentence cor-
rectness and complexity. (4) asking humans a di   erent
question, how helpful the descriptions would be for the
blind, we see that the ranking changes, indicating that
human judgments are sensitive to the question formu-
lation. in the future we plan to experiment more with
di   erent evaluation criteria.

7 conclusion

in this work we present the large scale movie descrip-
tion challenge (lsmdc), a novel dataset of movies
with aligned descriptions sourced from movie scripts
and ads (audio descriptions for the blind, also referred
to as dvs). altogether the dataset is based on 202
movies and has 118,114 sentences with aligned clips.
we compare ad with previously used script data and
   nd that ad tends to be more correct and relevant to
the movie than script sentences.

our approach, visual-labels, to automatic movie
description trains visual classi   ers and uses their scores
as input to an lstm. to handle the weak sentence
annotations we rely on three ingredients. (1) we dis-
tinguish three semantic groups of labels (verbs, objects
and places). (2) we train them separately, removing
the noisy negatives. (3) we select only the most re-
liable classi   ers. for sentence generation we show the
bene   ts of exploring di   erent lstm architectures and
learning con   gurations.

to evaluate di   erent approaches for movie descrip-
tion, we organized a challenge at iccv 2015 where we
evaluated submissions using automatic and human eval-
uation criteria. we found that the approaches s2vt
and our visual-labels generate longer and more diverse
description than the other submissions but are also
more susceptible to content or grammatical errors. this
consequently leads to worse human rankings with re-
spect to correctness and grammar. in contrast, frame-
video-concept fusion wins the challenge by predicting
medium length sentences with intermediate diversity,
which gets rated best in human evaluation for correct-
ness, grammar, and relevance. when ranking sentences
with respect to the criteria    helpful for the blind   , our

21

visual-labels is well received by human judges, likely
because it includes important aspects provided by the
strong visual labels. overall all approaches have prob-
lems with the challenging long-tail distributions of our
data. additional training data cannot fully ameliorate
this problem because a new movie might always con-
tain novel parts. we expect new techniques, including
relying on di   erent modalities, see e.g. (hendricks et al.
2016), to overcome this challenge.

our evaluation server will continue to be available
for automatic evaluation and we will hold a second ver-
sion of our challenge with human evaluation at eccv
2016 as part of the joint workshop on storytelling with
images and videos and large scale movie description
and understanding challenge. our dataset has already
been used beyond description, e.g. for learning video-
sentence embeddings or for movie id53.
beyond our current challenge on single sentences, the
dataset opens new possibilities to understand stories
and plots across multiple sentences in an open domain
scenario on large scale.

acknowledgements. marcus rohrbach was supported by
a fellowship within the fitweltweit-program of the ger-
man academic exchange service (daad).

references

collin f. baker, charles j. fillmore, and john b. lowe. the
berkeley framenet project. in proceedings of the annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics
(acl), 1998.

nicolas ballas, li yao, chris pal, and aaron courville. delv-
ing deeper into convolutional networks for learning video
representations. in international conference on learning
representations (iclr), 2016.

andrei barbu, alexander bridge, zachary burchill, dan
coroian, sven dickinson, sanja fidler, aaron michaux,
sam mussman, siddharth narayanaswamy, dhaval salvi,
lara schmidt, jiangnan shangguan, je   rey mark
siskind, jarrell waggoner, song wang, jinlian wei, yifan
yin, and zhiqi zhang. video in sentences out. in pro-
ceedings of the conference on uncertainty in arti   cial
intelligence (uai), 2012.

piotr bojanowski, francis bach, ivan laptev, jean ponce,
cordelia schmid, and josef sivic. finding actors and
actions in movies. in international conference on com-
puter vision (iccv), 2013.

piotr bojanowski, r  emi lajugie, francis bach, ivan laptev,
jean ponce, cordelia schmid, and josef sivic. weakly
supervised action labeling in videos under ordering con-
straints.
in european conference on id161
(eccv), 2014.

david chen and william dolan. collecting highly parallel
data for paraphrase evaluation. in proceedings of the an-
nual meeting of the association for computational lin-
guistics (acl), 2011.

xinlei chen and c. lawrence zitnick. mind   s eye: a recur-
rent visual representation for image id134.

22

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

conference on id161 and pattern recognition
(cvpr), 2015.

xinlei chen, hao fang, tsung-yi lin, ramakrishna vedan-
tam, saurabh gupta, piotr doll  ar, and c lawrence zit-
nick. microsoft coco captions: data collection and evalu-
ation server. arxiv:1504.00325, 2015.

timoth  ee cour, chris jordan, eleni miltsakaki, and ben
taskar. movie/script: alignment and parsing of video
and text transcription. in european conference on com-
puter vision (eccv), 2008.

timothee cour, benjamin sapp, chris jordan, and ben
taskar. learning from ambiguously labeled images. in
conference on id161 and pattern recognition
(cvpr), 2009.

dipanjan das, andr  e f.t. martins, and noah a. smith. an
exact id209 algorithm for shallow semantic
parsing with constraints.
in proceedings of the annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics
(acl), 2012.

pradipto das, chenliang xu, richard doell, and jason corso.
thousand frames in just a few words: lingual description
of videos through latent topics and sparse object stitch-
ing.
in conference on id161 and pattern
recognition (cvpr), 2013.

gerard de melo and niket tandon.

seeing is believing:
the quest for multimodal knowledge. sigweb newsl.,
(spring):4:1   4:9, april 2016.

luciano del corro and rainer gemulla. clausie: clause-
based id10.
in proceedings of
the international world wide web conference (www),
2013.

jia deng, wei dong, richard socher, li-jia li, kai li, and
li fei-fei.
id163: a large-scale hierarchical image
database. in conference on id161 and pat-
tern recognition (cvpr), 2009.

michael denkowski and alon lavie. meteor universal: lan-
guage speci   c translation evaluation for any target lan-
guage. in proceedings of the ninth workshop on statis-
tical machine translation, 2014.

jacob devlin, hao cheng, hao fang, saurabh gupta,
li deng, xiaodong he, geo   rey zweig, and margaret
mitchell. language models for image captioning: the
quirks and what works.
in proceedings of the annual
meeting of the association for computational linguis-
tics (acl), 2015.

je    donahue, lisa anne hendricks, sergio guadar-
rama, marcus rohrbach, subhashini venugopalan, kate
saenko, and trevor darrell. long-term recurrent convo-
lutional networks for visual recognition and description.
in conference on id161 and pattern recog-
nition (cvpr), 2015.

olivier duchenne, ivan laptev, josef sivic, francis bach, and
jean ponce. automatic annotation of human actions in
video. in international conference on id161
(iccv), 2009.

desmond elliott and frank keller. image description using
visual dependency representations. in proceedings of the
conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing (emnlp), pages 1292   1302, 2013.

mark everingham, josef sivic, and andrew zisserman.
   hello! my name is... bu   y    - automatic naming of char-
acters in tv video. in proceedings of the british machine
vision conference (bmvc), 2006.

hao fang, saurabh gupta, forrest n. iandola, rupesh sri-
vastava, li deng, piotr doll  ar, jianfeng gao, xiaodong
he, margaret mitchell, john c. platt, c. lawrence zit-

nick, and geo   rey zweig. from captions to visual con-
cepts and back. in conference on id161 and
pattern recognition (cvpr), 2015.

ali farhadi, mohsen hejrati, m.a. sadeghi, peter young,
c. rashtchian, julia hockenmaier, and d.a. forsyth.
every picture tells a story: generating sentences from
images.
in european conference on id161
(eccv), 2010.

christiane fellbaum. id138: an electronic lexical

database. the mit press, 1998.

langis gagnon, claude chapdelaine, david byrns, samuel
foucher, maguelonne heritier, and vishwa gupta.
a computer-vision-assisted system for videodescription
scripting.
in proceedings of the ieee conference on
id161 and pattern recognition workshops
(cvpr workshops), 2010.

sergio guadarrama, niveda krishnamoorthy, girish malka-
rnenkar, subhashini venugopalan, raymond mooney,
trevor darrell, and kate saenko. youtube2text: recog-
nizing and describing arbitrary activities using semantic
hierarchies and zero-shoot recognition. in international
conference on id161 (iccv), 2013.

lisa anne hendricks, subhashini venugopalan, marcus rohr-
bach, raymond mooney, kate saenko, and trevor dar-
rell. deep compositional captioning: describing novel ob-
ject categories without paired training data.
in con-
ference on id161 and pattern recognition
(cvpr), 2016.

geo   rey e hinton, nitish srivastava, alex krizhevsky, ilya
sutskever, and ruslan r salakhutdinov. improving neu-
ral networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature de-
tectors. arxiv:1207.0580, 2012.

sepp hochreiter and j  urgen schmidhuber. long short-term

memory. neural computation, 1997.

peter hodosh, alice young, micah lai, and julia hocken-
maier. from image descriptions to visual denotations:
new similarity metrics for semantic id136 over event
descriptions. in transactions of the association for com-
putational linguistics (tacl), 2014.

judy ho   man, sergio guadarrama, eric tzeng, je    don-
ahue, ross girshick, trevor darrell, and kate saenko.
lsda: large scale detection through adaptation.
in
conference on neural information processing systems
(nips), 2014.

andrej karpathy and li fei-fei. deep visual-semantic align-
ments for generating image descriptions. in conference
on id161 and pattern recognition (cvpr),
2015.

karen kipper, anna korhonen, neville ryant, and martha
palmer. extending verbnet with novel verb classes. in
proceedings of the international conference on language
resources and evaluation (lrec), 2006.

ryan kiros, ruslan salakhutdinov, and richard zemel. mul-
timodal neural language models. in international con-
ference on machine learning (icml), 2014.

ryan kiros, ruslan salakhutdinov, and richard s. zemel.
unifying visual-semantic embeddings with multimodal
neural language models. transactions of the association
for computational linguistics (tacl), 2015.

philipp koehn, hieu hoang, alexandra birch, chris callison-
burch, marcello federico, nicola bertoldi, brooke cowan,
wade shen, christine moran, richard zens, chris dyer,
ondrej bojar, alexandra constantin, and evan herbst.
moses: open source toolkit for statistical machine trans-
lation. in proceedings of the annual meeting of the as-
sociation for computational linguistics (acl), 2007.

movie description

23

atsuhiro kojima, takeshi tamura, and kunio fukunaga.
natural language description of human activities from
video images based on concept hierarchy of actions. in-
ternational journal of id161 (ijcv), 2002.

alex krizhevsky, ilya sutskever, and geo   rey e. hinton. im-
agenet classi   cation with deep convolutional neural net-
works. in conference on neural information processing
systems (nips), 2012.

girish kulkarni, visruth premraj, sagnik dhar, siming li,
yejin choi, alexander c. berg, and tamara l. berg.
baby talk: understanding and generating simple image
descriptions.
in conference on id161 and
pattern recognition (cvpr), 2011.

polina kuznetsova, vicente ordonez, alexander c berg,
tamara l berg, and yejin choi. collective generation of
natural image descriptions. in proceedings of the annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics
(acl), 2012.

polina kuznetsova, vicente ordonez, tamara l berg,
unc chapel hill, and yejin choi. treetalk: composi-
tion and compression of trees for image descriptions. in
transactions of the association for computational lin-
guistics (tacl), 2014.

lakritz and salway. the semi-automatic generation of audio
description from screenplays. technical report, dept. of
computing technical report, university of surrey, 2006.
ivan laptev, marcin marszalek, cordelia schmid, and ben-
jamin rozenfeld. learning realistic human actions from
movies. in conference on id161 and pattern
recognition (cvpr), 2008.

guang li, shubo ma, and yahong han. summarization-based
video caption via deep neural networks. in proceedings of
the 23rd annual acm conference on multimedia con-
ference, 2015.

siming li, girish kulkarni, tamara l berg, alexander c
berg, and yejin choi. composing simple image descrip-
tions using web-scale id165s. in proceedings of the fif-
teenth conference on computational natural language
learning (conll). association for computational lin-
guistics, 2011.

yuncheng li, yale song, liangliang cao, joel tetreault,
larry goldberg, alejandro jaimes, and jiebo luo. tgif:
a new dataset and benchmark on animated gif descrip-
tion.
in conference on id161 and pattern
recognition (cvpr), 2016.

chao liang, changsheng xu, jian cheng, and hanqing lu.
tvparser: an automatic tv video parsing method.
in
conference on id161 and pattern recognition
(cvpr), 2011.

chin-yew lin. id8: a package for automatic evaluation of
summaries. in text summarization branches out: pro-
ceedings of the acl-04 workshop, pages 74   81, 2004.

tsung-yi lin, michael maire, serge belongie, james hays,
pietro perona, deva ramanan, piotr doll  ar, and
c lawrence zitnick. microsoft coco: common objects
in context. in european conference on id161
(eccv), 2014.

junhua mao, wei xu, yi yang, jiang wang, zhiheng huang,
and alan yuille. deep captioning with multimodal recur-
rent neural networks (m-id56). in international confer-
ence on learning representations (iclr), 2015.

marcin marszalek, ivan laptev, and cordelia schmid. ac-
tions in context. in conference on id161 and
pattern recognition (cvpr), 2009.

margaret mitchell, jesse dodge, amit goyal, kota ya-
maguchi, karl stratos, xufeng han, alyssa mensch,

alexander c. berg, tamara l. berg, and hal daum  e iii.
midge: generating image descriptions from computer vi-
sion detections. in proceedings of the conference of the
european chapter of the association for computational
linguistics (eacl), 2012.

vicente ordonez, girish kulkarni, and tamara l. berg.
im2text: describing images using 1 million captioned pho-
tographs. in conference on neural information process-
ing systems (nips), 2011.

paul over, george awad, martial michel, jonathan fiscus,
greg sanders, b shaw, alan f. smeaton, and georges
qu  eenot. trecvid 2012     an overview of the goals, tasks,
data, evaluation mechanisms and metrics. in proceedings
of trecvid 2012. nist, usa, 2012.

pingbo pan, zhongwen xu, yi yang, fei wu, and yuet-
ing zhuang. hierarchical recurrent neural encoder for
video representation with application to captioning.
in
conference on id161 and pattern recognition
(cvpr), 2016a.

yingwei pan, tao mei, ting yao, houqiang li, and yong rui.
jointly modeling embedding and translation to bridge
video and language. in conference on id161
and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2016b.

kishore papineni, salim roukos, todd ward, and wei jing
zhu. id7: a method for automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation. in proceedings of the annual meeting
of the association for computational linguistics (acl),
2002.

ted pedersen, siddharth patwardhan, and jason michelizzi.
id138:: similarity: measuring the relatedness of con-
cepts. in demonstration papers at hlt-naacl 2004,
2004.

vignesh ramanathan, armand joulin, percy liang, and
li fei-fei. linking people in videos with    their    names
using coreference resolution. in european conference on
id161 (eccv), 2014.

michaela regneri, marcus rohrbach, dominikus wetzel, ste-
fan thater, bernt schiele, and manfred pinkal. ground-
ing action descriptions in videos. transactions of
the association for computational linguistics (tacl),
2013.

anna rohrbach, marcus rohrbach, wei qiu, annemarie
friedrich, manfred pinkal, and bernt schiele. coherent
multi-sentence video description with variable level of de-
tail. in proceedings of the german conference on pattern
recognition (gcpr), 2014.

anna rohrbach, marcus rohrbach, and bernt schiele. the
long-short story of movie description. arxiv:1506.01698,
2015a.

anna rohrbach, marcus rohrbach, and bernt schiele. the
long-short story of movie description. proceedings of the
german conference on pattern recognition (gcpr),
2015b.

anna rohrbach, marcus rohrbach, niket tandon, and bernt
schiele. a dataset for movie description. in conference
on id161 and pattern recognition (cvpr),
2015c.

marcus rohrbach, wei qiu, ivan titov, stefan thater, man-
fred pinkal, and bernt schiele. translating video content
to natural language descriptions. in international con-
ference on id161 (iccv), 2013.

olga russakovsky, jia deng, hao su, jonathan krause, san-
jeev satheesh, sean ma, zhiheng huang, andrej karpa-
thy, aditya khosla, michael bernstein, alexander c.
berg, and li fei-fei. id163 large scale visual recog-
nition challenge, 2014.

24

a. rohrbach, a. torabi, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, c. pal, h. larochelle, a. courville, b. schiele

andrew salway. a corpus-based analysis of audio description.
media for all: subtitling for the deaf, audio description
and sign language, 2007.

andrew salway, bart lehane, and noel e. o   connor. as-
sociating characters with events in    lms. in proceedings
of the acm international conference on image and video
retrieval (civr), 2007.

karin kipper schuler, anna korhonen, and susan windisch
brown. verbnet overview, extensions, mappings and ap-
plications. in proceedings of the conference of the north
american chapter of the association for computational
linguistics (naacl), 2009.

rakshith shetty and jorma laaksonen.

video cap-
tioning with recurrent networks based on frame-and
video-level
features and visual content classi   cation.
arxiv:1512.02949, 2015.

josef sivic, mark everingham, and andrew zisserman.    who
are you?   -learning person speci   c classi   ers from video.
in conference on id161 and pattern recog-
nition (cvpr), 2009.

richard socher, andrej karpathy, quoc v. le, christo-
pher d. manning, and andrew y. ng. grounded compo-
sitional semantics for    nding and describing images with
sentences. transactions of the association for computa-
tional linguistics (tacl), 2014.

niket tandon, gerard de melo, abir de, and gerhard
weikum. knowlywood: mining activity knowledge from
hollywood narratives. in proc. cikm, 2015.

makarand tapaswi, martin baeuml, and rainer stiefelhagen.
   knock! knock! who is it?    probabilistic person identi   ca-
tion in tv-series. in conference on id161 and
pattern recognition (cvpr), 2012.

makarand tapaswi, yukun zhu, rainer stiefelhagen, antonio
torralba, raquel urtasun, and sanja fidler. movieqa:
understanding stories
through question-
answering. in conference on id161 and pat-
tern recognition (cvpr), 2016.

in movies

jesse thomason, subhashini venugopalan, sergio guadar-
rama, kate saenko, and raymond j. mooney. integrat-
ing language and vision to generate natural language de-
scriptions of videos in the wild.
in proceedings of the
international conference on computational linguistics
(coling), 2014.

atousa torabi, christopher pal, hugo larochelle, and aaron
courville.
using descriptive video services to cre-
ate a large data source for video annotation research.
arxiv:1503.01070v1, 2015.

kristina toutanova, dan klein, christopher d. manning, and
yoram singer. feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with
a cyclic dependency network. in naacl    03: proceed-
ings of the 2003 conference of the north american chap-
ter of the association for computational linguistics on
human language technology. association for computa-
tional linguistics, 2003.

ramakrishna vedantam, c lawrence zitnick, and devi
parikh. cider: consensus-based image description eval-
uation. in conference on id161 and pattern
recognition (cvpr), 2015.

subhashini venugopalan, marcus rohrbach, je    donahue,
raymond mooney, trevor darrell, and kate saenko. se-
quence to sequence     video to text. arxiv:1505.00487v2,
2015a.

subhashini venugopalan, marcus rohrbach, je    donahue,
raymond mooney, trevor darrell, and kate saenko. se-
quence to sequence     video to text. in international con-
ference on id161 (iccv), 2015b.

subhashini venugopalan, huijuan xu, je    donahue, marcus
rohrbach, raymond mooney, and kate saenko. translat-
ing videos to natural language using deep recurrent neural
networks. in proceedings of the conference of the north
american chapter of the association for computational
linguistics (naacl), 2015c.

subhashini venugopalan, lisa anne hendricks, raymond
mooney, and kate saenko. improving lstm-based video
description with linguistic knowledge mined from text.
arxiv:1604.01729, 2016.

oriol vinyals, alexander toshev, samy bengio, and dumitru
erhan. show and tell: a neural image caption generator.
in conference on id161 and pattern recog-
nition (cvpr), 2015.

heng wang and cordelia schmid. action recognition with
in international conference on

improved trajectories.
id161 (iccv), 2013.

heng wang, alexander kl  aser, cordelia schmid, and c.l.
liu. dense trajectories and motion boundary descriptors
for action recognition. international journal of computer
vision (ijcv), 2013.

jianxiong xiao, james hays, krista a. ehinger, aude oliva,
and antonio torralba. sun database: large-scale scene
recognition from abbey to zoo. conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2010.

jun xu, tao mei, ting yao, and yong rui. msr-vtt: a large
video description dataset for bridging video and language.
in conference on id161 and pattern recog-
nition (cvpr), 2016.

kelvin xu, jimmy ba, ryan kiros, aaron courville, ruslan
salakhutdinov, richard zemel, and yoshua bengio. show,
attend and tell: neural image id134 with
visual attention. in international conference on machine
learning (icml), 2015a.

ran xu, caiming xiong, wei chen, and jason j. corso.
jointly modeling deep video and compositional text to
bridge vision and language in a uni   ed framework.
in
conference on arti   cial intelligence (aaai), 2015b.

li yao, atousa torabi, kyunghyun cho, nicolas ballas,
christopher pal, hugo larochelle, and aaron courville.
describing videos by exploiting temporal structure.
in
international conference on id161 (iccv),
2015.

li yao, nicolas ballas, kyunghyun cho, john r smith, and
yoshua bengio. empirical performance upper bounds for
image and video captioning. in international conference
on learning representations (iclr), 2016.

peter young, alice lai, micah hodosh, and julia hocken-
maier. from image descriptions to visual denotations:
new similarity metrics for semantic id136 over event
descriptions. transactions of the association for com-
putational linguistics (tacl), 2:67   78, 2014.

haonan yu, jiang wang, zhiheng huang, yi yang, and wei
xu. video paragraph captioning using hierarchical recur-
rent neural networks. in conference on id161
and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2016.

zhi zhong and hwee tou ng. it makes sense: a wide-coverage
id51 system for free text. in pro-
ceedings of the acl 2010 system demonstrations, 2010.
b. zhou, a. lapedriza, j. xiao, a. torralba, and a. oliva.
learning deep features for scene recognition using
places database. in conference on neural information
processing systems (nips), 2014.

linchao zhu, zhongwen xu, yi yang, and alexander g
hauptmann. uncovering temporal context for video ques-
tion and answering. arxiv:1511.04670, 2015a.

movie description

25

yukun zhu, ryan kiros, richard zemel, ruslan salakhutdi-
nov, raquel urtasun, antonio torralba, and sanja fidler.
aligning books and movies: towards story-like visual ex-
planations by watching movies and reading books.
in
international conference on id161 (iccv),
2015b.

