deep photo style transfer

fujun luan

cornell university

sylvain paris

adobe

eli shechtman

adobe

fujun@cs.cornell.edu

sparis@adobe.com

elishe@adobe.com

kavita bala

cornell university
kb@cs.cornell.edu

7
1
0
2

 
r
p
a
1
1

 

 
 
]

v
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

3
v
1
1
5
7
0

.

3
0
7
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

figure 1: given a reference style image (a) and an input image (b), we seek to create an output image of the same scene as
the input, but with the style of the reference image. the neural style algorithm [5] (c) successfully transfers colors, but also
introduces distortions that make the output look like a painting, which is undesirable in the context of photo style transfer. in
comparison, our result (d) transfers the color of the reference style image equally well while preserving the photorealism of
the output. on the right (e), we show 3 insets of (b), (c), and (d) (in that order). zoom in to compare results.

abstract

1. introduction

this paper introduces a deep-learning approach to pho-
tographic style transfer that handles a large variety of image
content while faithfully transferring the reference style. our
approach builds upon the recent work on painterly transfer
that separates style from the content of an image by consid-
ering different layers of a neural network. however, as is,
this approach is not suitable for photorealistic style transfer.
even when both the input and reference images are pho-
tographs, the output still exhibits distortions reminiscent of a
painting. our contribution is to constrain the transformation
from the input to the output to be locally af   ne in colorspace,
and to express this constraint as a custom fully differentiable
energy term. we show that this approach successfully sup-
presses distortion and yields satisfying photorealistic style
transfers in a broad variety of scenarios, including transfer
of the time of day, weather, season, and artistic edits.

photographic style transfer is a long-standing problem
that seeks to transfer the style of a reference style photo
onto another input picture. for instance, by appropriately
choosing the reference style photo, one can make the input
picture look like it has been taken under a different illumina-
tion, time of day, or weather, or that it has been artistically
retouched with a different intent. so far, existing techniques
are either limited in the diversity of scenes or transfers that
they can handle or in the faithfulness of the stylistic match
they achieve. in this paper, we introduce a deep-learning
approach to photographic style transfer that is at the same
time broad and faithful, i.e., it handles a large variety of
image content while accurately transferring the reference
style. our approach builds upon the recent work on neural
style transfer by gatys et al. [5]. however, as shown in
figure 1, even when the input and reference style images
are photographs, the output still looks like a painting, e.g.,
straight edges become wiggly and regular textures wavy.
one of our contributions is to remove these painting-like

1

effects by preventing spatial distortion and constraining the
transfer operation to happen only in color space. we achieve
this goal with a transformation model that is locally af   ne in
colorspace, which we express as a custom fully differentiable
energy term inspired by the matting laplacian [9]. we show
that this approach successfully suppresses distortion while
having a minimal impact on the transfer faithfulness. our
other key contribution is a solution to the challenge posed
by the difference in content between the input and reference
images, which could result in undesirable transfers between
unrelated content. for example, consider an image with less
sky visible in the input image; a transfer that ignores the
difference in context between style and input may cause the
style of the sky to    spill over    the rest of the picture. we
show how to address this issue using semantic segmenta-
tion [3] of the input and reference images. we demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach with satisfying photorealis-
tic style transfers for a broad variety of scenarios including
transfer of the time of day, weather, season, and artistic edits.
1.1. challenges and contributions

from a practical perspective, our contribution is an ef-
fective algorithm for photographic style transfer suitable
for many applications such as altering the time of day or
weather of a picture, or transferring artistic edits from a
photo to another. to achieve this result, we had to address
two fundamental challenges.

structure preservation. there is an inherent tension in
our objectives. on the one hand, we aim to achieve very
local drastic effects, e.g., to turn on the lights on individual
skyscraper windows (fig. 1). on the other hand, these effects
should not distort edges and regular patterns, e.g., so that the
windows remain aligned on a grid. formally, we seek a trans-
formation that can strongly affect image colors while having
no geometric effect, i.e., nothing moves or distorts. reinhard
et al. [12] originally addressed this challenge with a global
color transform. however, by de   nition, such a transform
cannot model spatially varying effects and thus is limited
in its ability to match the desired style. more expressivity
requires spatially varying effects, further adding to the chal-
lenge of preventing spatial distortion. a few techniques exist
for speci   c scenarios [8, 15] but the general case remains
unaddressed. our work directly takes on this challenge and
provides a    rst solution to restricting the solution space to
photorealistic images, thereby touching on the fundamental
task of differentiating photos from paintings.

semantic accuracy and transfer faithfulness. the com-
plexity of real-world scenes raises another challenge: the
transfer should respect the semantics of the scene. for in-
stance, in a cityscape, the appearance of buildings should be
matched to buildings, and sky to sky; it is not acceptable to

make the sky look like a building. one plausible approach is
to match each input neural patch with the most similar patch
in the style image to minimize the chances of an inaccurate
transfer. this strategy is essentially the one employed by
the id98mrf method [10]. while plausible, we    nd that it
often leads to results where many input patches get paired
with the same style patch, and/or that entire regions of the
style image are ignored, which generates outputs that poorly
match the desired style.

one solution to this problem is to transfer the complete
   style distribution    of the reference style photo as captured
by the gram matrix of the neural responses [5]. this ap-
proach successfully prevents any region from being ignored.
however, there may be some scene elements more (or less)
represented in the input than in the reference image. in such
cases, the style of the large elements in the reference style
image    spills over    into mismatching elements of the input
image, generating artifacts like building texture in the sky. a
contribution of our work is to incorporate a semantic labeling
of the input and style images into the transfer procedure so
that the transfer happens between semantically equivalent
subregions and within each of them, the mapping is close
to uniform. as we shall see, this algorithm preserves the
richness of the desired style and prevents spillovers. these
issues are demonstrated in figure 2.

1.2. related work

global style transfer algorithms process an image by ap-
plying a spatially-invariant transfer function. these methods
are effective and can handle simple styles like global color
shifts (e.g., sepia) and tone curves (e.g., high or low con-
trast). for instance, reinhard et al. [12] match the means and
standard deviations between the input and reference style
image after converting them into a decorrelated color space.
piti   et al. [11] describe an algorithm to transfer the full 3d
color histogram using a series of 1d histograms. as we shall
see in the result section, these methods are limited in their
ability to match sophisticated styles.

local style transfer algorithms based on spatial color map-
pings are more expressive and can handle a broad class of ap-
plications such as time-of-day hallucination [4, 15], transfer
of artistic edits [1, 14, 17], weather and season change [4, 8],
and painterly stylization [5, 6, 10, 13]. our work is most di-
rectly related to the line of work initiated by gatys et al. [5]
that employs the feature maps of discriminatively trained
deep convolutional neural networks such as vgg-19 [16]
to achieve groundbreaking performance for painterly style
transfer [10, 13]. the main difference with these techniques
is that our work aims for photorealistic transfer, which, as
we previously discussed, introduces a challenging tension
between local changes and large-scale consistency. in that
respect, our algorithm is related to the techniques that oper-
ate in the photo realm [1, 4, 8, 14, 15, 17]. but unlike these

2

figure 2: given an input image (a) and a reference style image (e), the results (b) of gatys et al. [5] (neural style) and (c) of
li et al. [10] (id98mrf) present artifacts due to strong distortions when compared to (d) our result. in (f,g,h), we compute
the correspondence between the output and the reference style where, for each pixel, we encode the xy coordinates of the
nearest patch in the reference style image as a color with (r, g, b) = (0, 255    y /height, 255    x/width). the nearest
neural patch is found using the l2 norm on the neural responses of the vgg-19 conv3_1 layer, similarly to id98mrf. neural
style computes global statistics of the reference style image which tends to produce texture mismatches as shown in the
correspondence (f), e.g., parts of the sky in the output image map to the buildings from the reference style image. id98mrf
computes a nearest-neighbor search of the reference style image which tends to have many-to-one mappings as shown in the
correspondence (g), e.g., see the buildings. in comparison, our result (d) prevents distortions and matches the texture correctly
as shown in the correspondence (h).

techniques that are dedicated to a speci   c scenario, our ap-
proach is generic and can handle a broader diversity of style
images.

2. method

our algorithm takes two images: an input image which is
usually an ordinary photograph and a stylized and retouched
reference image, the reference style image. we seek to trans-
fer the style of the reference to the input while keeping the
result photorealistic. our approach augments the neural
style algorithm [5] by introducing two core ideas.

    we propose a photorealism id173 term in the
objective function during the optimization, constraining
the reconstructed image to be represented by locally
af   ne color transformations of the input to prevent dis-
tortions.

    we introduce an optional guidance to the style transfer
process based on semantic segmentation of the inputs
(similar to [2]) to avoid the content-mismatch problem,
which greatly improves the photorealism of the results.

background. for completeness, we summarize the neural
style algorithm by gatys et al. [5] that transfers the reference
style image s onto the input image i to produce an output
image o by minimizing the objective function:

l(cid:88)

(cid:96)=1

ltotal =

with: l(cid:96)
c = 1
l(cid:96)
s = 1
2n 2
(cid:96)

2n(cid:96)d(cid:96)

l(cid:88)

  (cid:96)l(cid:96)

c +   

  (cid:96)l(cid:96)

s

(cid:96)=1

(cid:80)
(cid:80)
ij(f(cid:96)[o]     f(cid:96)[i])2
ij(g(cid:96)[o]     g(cid:96)[s])2

ij

ij

(1a)

(1b)
(1c)

where l is the total number of convolutional layers and (cid:96)
indicates the (cid:96)-th convolutional layer of the deep convolu-
tional neural network. in each layer, there are n(cid:96)    lters each
with a vectorized feature map of size d(cid:96). f(cid:96)[  ]     rn(cid:96)  d(cid:96)
is the feature matrix with (i, j) indicating its index and the
gram matrix g(cid:96)[  ] = f(cid:96)[  ]f(cid:96)[  ]t     rn(cid:96)  n(cid:96) is de   ned as
the inner product between the vectorized feature maps.   (cid:96)
and   (cid:96) are the weights to con   gure layer preferences and   
is a weight that balances the tradeoff between the content
(eq. 1b) and the style (eq. 1c).

3

photorealism id173. we now describe how we
regularize this optimization scheme to preserve the structure
of the input image and produce photorealistic outputs. our
strategy is to express this constraint not on the output image
directly but on the transformation that is applied to the input
image. characterizing the space of photorealistic images is
an unsolved problem. our insight is that we do not need
to solve it if we exploit the fact that the input is already
photorealistic. our strategy is to ensure that we do not
lose this property during the transfer by adding a term to
equation 1a that penalizes image distortions. our solution
is to seek an image transform that is locally af   ne in color
space, that is, a function such that for each output patch, there
is an af   ne function that maps the input rgb values onto
their output counterparts. each patch can have a different
af   ne function, which allows for spatial variations. to gain
some intuition, one can consider an edge patch. the set of
af   ne combinations of the rgb channels spans a broad set
of variations but the edge itself cannot move because it is
located at the same place in all channels.

formally, we build upon the matting laplacian of levin
et al. [9] who have shown how to express a grayscale matte
as a locally af   ne combination of the input rgb channels.
they describe a least-squares penalty function that can be
minimized with a standard linear system represented by a
matrix mi that only depends on the input image i (we refer
to the original article for the detailed derivation. note that
given an input image i with n pixels, mi is n    n). we
name vc[o] the vectorized version (n    1) of the output
image o in channel c and de   ne the following id173
term that penalizes outputs that are not well explained by a
locally af   ne transform:

3(cid:88)

lm =

vc[o]tmi vc[o]

(2)

c=1

using this term in a gradient-based solver requires us to
compute its derivative w.r.t. the output image. since mi is
a symmetric matrix, we have: dlm

dvc[o] = 2mi vc[o].

augmented style loss with semantic segmentation. a
limitation of the style term (eq. 1c) is that the gram ma-
trix is computed over the entire image. since a gram matrix
determines its constituent vectors up to an isometry [18], it
implicitly encodes the exact distribution of neural responses,
which limits its ability to adapt to variations of semantic
context and can cause    spillovers   . we address this problem
with an approach akin to neural doodle [1] and a semantic
segmentation method [3] to generate image segmentation
masks for the input and reference images for a set of com-
mon labels (sky, buildings, water, etc.). we add the masks
to the input image as additional channels and augment the

4

l(cid:88)

l(cid:88)

neural style algorithm by concatenating the segmentation
channels and updating the style loss as follows:

c(cid:88)

c=1

(cid:88)

ij

l(cid:96)
s+ =

1
2n 2
(cid:96),c

(g(cid:96),c[o]     g(cid:96),c[s])2

ij

f(cid:96),c[o] = f(cid:96)[o]m(cid:96),c[i] f(cid:96),c[s] = f(cid:96)[s]m(cid:96),c[s]

(3a)

(3b)

where c is the number of channels in the semantic segmenta-
tion mask, m(cid:96),c[  ] denotes the channel c of the segmentation
mask in layer (cid:96), and g(cid:96),c[  ] is the gram matrix corresponding
to f(cid:96),c[  ]. we downsample the masks to match the feature
map spatial size at each layer of the convolutional neural
network.

to avoid    orphan semantic labels    that are only present in
the input image, we constrain the input semantic labels to be
chosen among the labels of the reference style image. while
this may cause erroneous labels from a semantic standpoint,
the selected labels are in general equivalent in our context,
e.g.,    lake    and    sea   . we have also observed that the seg-
mentation does not need to be pixel accurate since eventually
the output is constrained by our id173.

our approach. we formulate the photorealistic style
transfer objective by combining all 3 components together:

ltotal =

  (cid:96)l(cid:96)

c +   

  (cid:96)l(cid:96)

s+ +   lm

(4)

l=1

(cid:96)=1

where l is the total number of convolutional layers and
(cid:96) indicates the (cid:96)-th convolutional layer of the deep neural
network.    is a weight that controls the style loss.   (cid:96) and
  (cid:96) are the weights to con   gure layer preferences.    is a
weight that controls the photorealism id173. l(cid:96)
c is
the content loss (eq. 1b). l(cid:96)
s+ is the augmented style loss
(eq. 3a). lm is the photorealism id173 (eq. 2).
3. implementation details

this section describes the implementation details of our
approach. we employed the pre-trained vgg-19 [16] as the
feature extractor. we chose conv4_2 (  (cid:96) = 1 for this layer
and   (cid:96) = 0 for all other layers) as the content representa-
tion, and conv1_1, conv2_1, conv3_1, conv4_1 and conv5_1
(  (cid:96) = 1/5 for those layers and   (cid:96) = 0 for all other layers)
as the style representation. we used these layer preferences
and parameters    = 102,    = 104 for all the results. the
effect of    is illustrated in figure 3.

we use the original author   s matlab implementation of
levin et al. [9] to compute the matting laplacian matrices
and modi   ed the publicly available torch implementation [7]
of the neural style algorithm. the derivative of the pho-
torealism id173 term is implemented in cuda for
gradient-based optimization.

(a) input and style

(b)    = 1

(c)    = 102

(d)    = 104, our result

(e)    = 106

(f)    = 108

figure 3: transferring the dramatic appearance of the reference style image ((a)-inset), onto an ordinary    at shot in (a) is
challenging. we produce results using our method with different    parameters. a too small    value cannot prevent distortions,
and thus the results have a non-photorealistic look in (b,c). conversely, a too large    value suppresses the style to be transferred
yielding a half-transferred look in (e,f). we found the best parameter    = 104 to be the sweet spot to produce our result (d)
and all the other results in this paper.

we initialize our optimization using the output of the neu-
ral style algorithm (eq. 1a) with the augmented style loss
(eq. 3a), which itself is initialized with a random noise. this
two-stage optimization works better than solving for equa-
tion 4 directly, as it prevents the suppression of proper local
color transfer due to the strong photorealism id173.
we use dilatednet [3] for segmenting both the input
image and reference style image. as is, this technique rec-
ognizes 150 categories. we found that this    ne-grain classi-
   cation was unnecessary and a source of instability in our
algorithm. we merged similar classes such as    lake   ,    river   ,
   ocean   , and    water    that are equivalent in our context to
get a reduced set of classes that yields cleaner and simpler
segmentations, and eventually better outputs. the merged
labels are detailed in the supplemental material.

our code is available at: https://github.com/

luanfujun/deep-photo-styletransfer.

4. results and comparison

we have performed a series of experiments to validate our
approach. we    rst discuss visual comparisons with previous
work before reporting the results of two user studies.

we compare our method with gatys et al. [5] (neural
style for short) and li et al. [10] (id98mrf for short) across
a series of indoor and outdoor scenes in figure 4. both tech-
niques produce results with painting-like distortions, which
are undesirable in the context of photographic style transfer.
the neural style algorithm also suffers from spillovers in
several cases, e.g., with the sky taking on the style of the
ground. and as previously discussed, id98mrf often gener-
ates partial style transfers that ignore signi   cant portions of
the style image. in comparison, our photorealism regulariza-
tion and semantic segmentation prevent these artifacts from
happening and our results look visually more satisfying.

in figure 5, we compare our method with global style
transfer methods that do not distort images, reinhard et
al. [12] and piti   et al. [11]. both techniques apply a global
color mapping to match the color statistics between the input
image and the style image, which limits the faithfulness

of their results when the transfer requires spatially-varying
color transformation. our transfer is local and capable of
handling context-sensitive color changes.

in figure 6, we compare our method with the time-of-
day hallucination of shih et al. [15]. the two results look
drastically different because our algorithm directly repro-
duces the style of the reference style image whereas shih   s
is an analogy-based technique that transfers the color change
observed in a time-lapse video. both results are visually
satisfying and we believe that which one is most useful
depends on the application. from a technical perspective,
our approach is more practical because it requires only a
single style photo in addition to the input picture whereas
shih   s hallucination needs a full time-lapse video, which is
a less common medium and requires more storage. further,
our algorithm can handle other scenarios beside time-of-day
hallucination.

in figure 7, we show how users can control the transfer
results simply by providing the semantic masks. this use
case enables artistic applications and also makes it possible
to handle extreme cases for which semantic labeling cannot
help, e.g., to match a transparent perfume bottle to a    reball.
in figure 8, we show examples of failure due to extreme
mismatch. these can be    xed using manual segmentation.
we provide additional results such as comparison against
wu et al. [19], results with only semantic segmentation or
photorealism id173 applied separately, and a solu-
tion for handling noisy or high-resolution input in the sup-
plemental material. all our results were generated using a
two-stage optimization in 3~5 minutes on an nvidia titan
x gpu.

user studies. we conducted two user studies to validate
our work. first, we assessed the photorealism of several tech-
niques: ours, the histogram transfer of piti   et al. [11], cn-
nmrf [10], and neural style [5]. we asked users to score
images on a 1-to-4 scale ranging from    de   nitely not photo-
realistic    to    de   nitely photorealistic   . we used 8 different
scenes for each of the 4 methods for a total of 32 questions.

5

(a) input image

(b) reference style image

(c) neural style

(d) id98mrf

(e) our result

figure 4: comparison of our method against neural style and id98mrf. both neural style and id98mrf produce strong
distortions in their synthesized images. neural style also entirely ignores the semantic context for style transfer. id98mrf
tends to ignore most of the texture in the reference style image since it uses nearest neighbor search. our approach is free of
distortions and matches texture semantically.

we collected 40 responses per question on average. figure 9a
shows that id98mrf and neural style produce nonphoto-
realistic results, which con   rms our observation that these

techniques introduce painting-like distortions. it also shows
that, although our approach scores below histogram transfer,
it nonetheless produces photorealistic outputs. motivated

6

(a) input image

(b) reference style image

(c) reinhard et al. [12]

(d) piti   et al. [11]

(e) our result

figure 5: comparison of our method against reinhard et al. [12] and piti   [11]. our method provides more    exibility in
transferring spatially-variant color changes, yielding better results than previous techniques.

by this result, we conducted a second study to estimate the
faithfulness of the style transfer techniques. we found that
global methods consistently generated distortion-free results

but with a variable level of style faithfulness. we compared
against several global methods in our second study: rein-
hard   s statistics transfer [12], piti     s histogram transfer [11],

7

(a) input image

(b) reference style image

(c) our result

(d) shih et al. [15]

figure 6: our method and the techique of shih et al. [15] generate visually satisfying results. however, our algorithm requires
a single style image instead of a full time-lapse video, and it can handle other scenarios in addition to time-of-day hallucination.

input image so that users could focus on the output images.
we showed 20 comparisons and collected 35 responses per
question on average. the study shows that our algorithm
produces the most faithful style transfer results more than
80% of the time (fig. 9b). we provide the links to our user
study websites in the supplemental material.

(a) input

(b) reference style

(c) our result

(d) input

(e) our result

figure 7: manual segmentation enables diverse tasks such as
transferring a    reball (b) to a perfume bottle (a) to produce a
   re-illuminated look (c), or switching the texture between
different apples (d, e).

(a) input

(b) reference style

(c) our result

figure 8: failure cases due to extreme mismatch.

figure 9: user study results con   rming that our algorithm
produces photorealistic and faithful results.

5. conclusions

we introduce a deep-learning approach that faithfully
transfers style from a reference image for a wide variety of
image content. we use the matting laplacian to constrain
the transformation from the input to the output to be locally
af   ne in colorspace. semantic segmentation further drives
more meaningful style transfer yielding satisfying photoreal-
istic results in a broad variety of scenarios, including transfer
of the time of day, weather, season, and artistic edits.

acknowledgments

and photoshop match color. users were shown a style image
and 4 transferred outputs, the 3 previously mentioned global
methods and our technique (randomly ordered to avoid bias),
and asked to choose the image with the most similar style to
the reference style image. we, on purpose, did not show the

we thank leon gatys, fr  do durand, aaron hertzmann
as well as the anonymous reviewers for their valuable dis-
cussions. we thank fuzhang wu for generating results us-
ing [19]. this research is supported by a google faculty re-
search award, and nsf awards iis 1617861 and 1513967.

8

photorealisticchance (25%)notphotorealistic12histogram transfer(piti   et al.)(a) photorealism scores(b) style faithfulness preferencehistogram transfer(piti   et al.)statistics transfer(reinhard et al.)photoshopmatch colorneural style(gatys et al.)id98mrf(li et al.)our algorithmour algorithm345.8%3.14  0.381.46  0.301.43  0.372.71  0.204.6%2.9%86.8% [18] e. w. weisstein. gram matrix. mathworld   a wolfram web
resource. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/grammatrix.html.
4

[19] f. wu, w. dong, y. kong, x. mei, j.-c. paul, and x. zhang.
content-based colour transfer. in computer graphics forum,
volume 32, pages 190   203. wiley online library, 2013. 5, 8

references
[1] s. bae, s. paris, and f. durand. two-scale tone management
for photographic look. in acm transactions on graphics
(tog), volume 25, pages 637   645. acm, 2006. 2, 4

[2] a. j. champandard. semantic style transfer and turning two-

bit doodles into    ne artworks. mar 2016. 3

[3] l.-c. chen, g. papandreou, i. kokkinos, k. murphy, and a. l.
yuille. deeplab: semantic image segmentation with deep
convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected
crfs. arxiv preprint arxiv:1606.00915, 2016. 2, 4, 5

[4] j. r. gardner, m. j. kusner, y. li, p. upchurch, k. q. wein-
berger, k. bala, and j. e. hopcroft. deep manifold traver-
sal: changing labels with convolutional features. corr,
abs/1511.06421, 2015. 2

[5] l. a. gatys, a. s. ecker, and m. bethge. image style transfer
using convolutional neural networks. in proceedings of the
ieee conference on id161 and pattern recogni-
tion, pages 2414   2423, 2016. 1, 2, 3, 5

[6] a. hertzmann, c. e. jacobs, n. oliver, b. curless, and d. h.
salesin. image analogies. in proceedings of the 28th annual
conference on computer graphics and interactive techniques,
pages 327   340. acm, 2001. 2

[7] j. johnson.

neural-style.

https://github.com/

jcjohnson/neural-style, 2015. 4

[8] p.-y. laffont, z. ren, x. tao, c. qian, and j. hays. transient
attributes for high-level understanding and editing of outdoor
scenes. acm transactions on graphics, 33(4), 2014. 2

[9] a. levin, d. lischinski, and y. weiss. a closed-form solution
ieee transactions on pattern
to natural image matting.
analysis and machine intelligence, 30(2):228   242, 2008. 2,
4

[10] c. li and m. wand. combining markov random    elds and
convolutional neural networks for image synthesis. arxiv
preprint arxiv:1601.04589, 2016. 2, 3, 5

[11] f. pitie, a. c. kokaram, and r. dahyot. n-dimensional
id203 density function transfer and its application to
color transfer. in tenth ieee international conference on
id161 (iccv   05) volume 1, volume 2, pages 1434   
1439. ieee, 2005. 2, 5, 7

[12] e. reinhard, m. adhikhmin, b. gooch, and p. shirley. color
transfer between images. ieee computer graphics and ap-
plications, 21(5):34   41, 2001. 2, 5, 7

[13] a. selim, m. elgharib, and l. doyle. painting style transfer
for head portraits using convolutional neural networks. acm
transactions on graphics (tog), 35(4):129, 2016. 2

[14] y. shih, s. paris, c. barnes, w. t. freeman, and f. durand.

style transfer for headshot portraits. 2014. 2

[15] y. shih, s. paris, f. durand, and w. t. freeman. data-driven
hallucination of different times of day from a single outdoor
photo. acm transactions on graphics (tog), 32(6):200,
2013. 2, 5, 8

[16] k. simonyan and a. zisserman. very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. arxiv preprint
arxiv:1409.1556, 2014. 2, 4

[17] k. sunkavalli, m. k. johnson, w. matusik, and h. p   ster.
multi-scale image harmonization. acm transactions on
graphics (tog), 29(4):125, 2010. 2

9

