lstm based conversation models

yi luan1, yangfeng ji2, mari ostendorf1

1department of electrical engineering, university of washington, seattle, wa 98195
2school of interactive computing, georgia institute of technology, atlanta, ga 30332

luanyi@uw.edu, jiyfeng@gatech.edu, ostendor@uw.edu

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

m
1
3

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
4
9
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

in this paper, we present a conversational model that incorpo-
rates both context and participant role for two-party conversa-
tions. different architectures are explored for integrating par-
ticipant role and context information into a long short-term
memory (lstm) language model. the conversational model
can function as a language model or a language generation
model. experiments on the ubuntu dialog corpus show that
our model can capture multiple turn interaction between partic-
ipants. the proposed method outperforms a traditional lstm
model as measured by language model perplexity and response
ranking. generated responses show characteristic differences
between the two participant roles.

1. introduction

as automatic language understanding and generation technol-
ogy improves, there is increasing interest in building human-
computer conversational systems, which can be used for a vari-
ety of applications such as travel planning, tutorial systems or
chat-based technical support. most work has emphasized un-
derstanding or generating a word sequence associated with a
single sentence or speaker turn, potentially leveraging the previ-
ous turn. beyond local context, language use in a goal-oriented
conversation re   ects the global topic of discussion, as well as
the respective role of each participant. in this work, we intro-
duce a conversational language model that incorporates both lo-
cal and global context together with participant role.

in particular, participant roles (or speaker roles) impact
content of a sentence in terms of both the information to be com-
municated and the interaction strategy, affecting both meaning
and conversational structure. for example, in broadcast news,
speaker roles are shown to be informative for discovering the
story structures [1]; they impact speaking time and turn-taking
[2]; and they are associated with particular phrase patterns [3].
in online discussions, speaker role is useful for detecting au-
thority claims [4]. other work shows that in casual conversa-
tions, speakers with different roles are likely to use different
discourse markers [5]. for the ubuntu technical support data
used in this study, table 1 illustrates differences in the distri-
butions of frequent words for the poster vs. responder roles.
the poster role tends to raise questions using words any-
one, how. the responder role tends to use directive words
(you, you   re), hedges (may, might) and words related to problem
solving (sudo, check).

speci   cally, we propose a neural network model that builds
on recent work in response generation, integrating different
methods that have been used for capturing local (previous sen-
tence) context and more global context, and extending the net-
work architecture to incorporate role information. the model
can be used as a language model, as in id103 or

translation, but our focus here is on response generation. ex-
periments are conducted with ubuntu chat logs, using language
model perplexity and response ranking, as well as qualitative
analysis.

2. related work

data-driven methods are now widely used for building conver-
sation systems. with the popularity of social media, such as
twitter, sina weibo, and online discussion forums, it is easier
to collect conversation text [6, 7]. several different data-driven
models have been proposed to build conversation systems. rit-
ter et al. [8] present a id151 based con-
versation system. recently, neural network models have been
explored. the    exibility of neural network models opens the
possibility of integrating different kinds of information into the
generation procedure. for example, sordoni et al. [9] present a
way to integrate contextual information via feed-forward neural
networks. li et al. propose using maximum mutual informa-
tion (mmi) as the objective function in neural models in or-
der to produce more diverse and interesting responses. shang
et al. [10] introduce the attention mechanism into an encoder-
decoder network for a conversation model. most similar to our
work is the semantic controlled lstm (sc-lstm) proposed
by wan et al. [11], where a dialog-act component is introduced
into the lstm cell to guide the generated content. in this work,
we utilize the role information to bias response generation with-
out modifying lstm cells.

ef   ciently capturing local and global context remains a
open problem in id38. different ways of model-
ing document-level context has been explored in [12] and [13]
based on the lstm framework. luan et al. [14] proposed a
multi-scale recurrent architecture to incorporate both word and
turn level context for spoken language understanding tasks. in
this paper, we use a similar approach as [16], explicitly using
latent dirichlet analysis (lda) as global-context feature to
feed into id56lm.

early work on incorporating local context in conversa-
tional id38 is described in [17] conditioned on
the most recent word spoken by other speakers. hutchinson et
al. [18, 19] improve log-bilinear language model by introducing
a multi-factor sparse matrix that could capture speaker role and
topic information. in addition, huang et al. [20] show that lan-
guage models with role information signi   cantly reduce word
error rate in id103. our work differs from these
approaches in using an lstm. recently, li et al. propose us-
ing an additional vector to lstm in order to capture personal
characteristics of a speaker [21]. in this work, we utilize both a
global topic vector and role information, where a role-speci   c
weight matrix biases the word distributions for different roles.

p(w|p oster)/p(w|responder)
p(w|responder)/p(w|p oster)

hi, hello, anyone, hey, guys, ideas, thanks, thank, my, how, am, ??, cannot, i   m, says
you   re, your, probably, you, may, might, sudo, ->, search, sure, ask, maybe, most, check, try

table 1: top 15 words based on the role likelihood ratio out of the subset with word count > 6k.

3. model

in this section, we propose an lstm based framework that in-
tegrating participant role and global topic of the conversation.
as discussed in section 1, the assumption is, given the same
context, each role has its own preference of picking words to
generate a response. each generated response should be both
topically related to the current conversation and coherent with
the local context.

3.1. recurrent neural network language models
we start building a response generation model [9] by using a
recurrent neural network language model (id56lm) [22]. in
general, a id56lm is a generative model of sentences. for a
sentence consisted of word sequence x1, . . . , xi, the probabil-
ity of xi given x1, . . . , xi   1 (cid:44) x   i   1 is

p(xi|x   i   1)     g   (hi)

(1)
where hi is the current hidden state and g   (  ) is the id203
function parameterized by   :

g   (hi) = softmax(w   hi),

(2)

where w   is the output layer parameter. the hidden state hi is
computed recurrently as

hi = f   (xi, hi   1) .

(3)
f   (  ) is a nonlinear function parameterized by   . we use an
lstm [23] since it is good at capturing long-term dependency,
which is an objective for our conversation model.

3.2. conversation models with speaker roles
to build a conversation model with different participant roles,
we extend a id56lm in two respects. first, to capture the
variability from different participant roles, we incorporate role-
based information into the generation procedure. second, to
model a conversation instead of single turns, our model adjoins
id56lms for all turns in sequence to model the whole conver-
sation.
more speci   cally, consider two adjacent turns1 xt   1 =
{xt   1,i}nt   1
i=1 with their participant role
rt   1 and rt respectively. nt is the number of words in the
t-th turn. to build a single model for the entire conversation,
we simply concatenate the id56lms for all sentences in order.
concatenation changes the way of computing the    rst hidden
state in each utterance (except the    rst utterance in the conver-
sation). considering the two turns xt   1 and xt, after concate-
nation, the computation of the    rst hidden state in turn xt, ht,1,
is

and xt = {xt,i}nt

i=1

ht,1 = f  

(4)
as we will see from section 4, this simple solution can capture
the long-term contextual information.

(cid:0)xt,1, ht   1,nt   1

(cid:1) .

1in our formulation, we use one turn as the minimal unit as multiple

sentences in one turn share the same role.

we introduce the role-based information by de   ning a role-
dependent function g  ,r (  ). for example, the id203 of xt,i
given xt,i   1, . . . , x1,1 (cid:44) x   t,   i   1 and its role rt is

p(xt,i|x   t,   i   1, rt)     g  ,rt (ht,i) .

(5)
where the g  ,rt (  ) is also parameterized by role rt. in our im-
plementation, we use

g  ,rt (ht,i) = softmax(w   (wrt ht,i)),

(6)
where w       rv   h, wrt     rh  h, v, h are the vocabu-
lary size and hidden layer dimension respectively. even w  
is shared across the entire conversation model, wrt is role-
speci   c. this linear transformation de   ned in eq. 6 is easy to
train in practice and appears to capture role information. this
model is named the r-conv model, as the role-based infor-
mation is introduced in the output layer.

despite the difference between the two models, they can
be learned in the same way, which is similar to training a
id56lm [22]. following the way of training a language model,
the parameters could be learned by maximizing the following

objective function (cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:96)(xt,k+1, yt,k)

(7)

k

t

where yt,k is the prediction of xt,i+1. (cid:96)(  ,  ) can be any loss
function for classi   cation task. we choose cross id178 [24] as
the id168 (cid:96)(  ,  ), because it is a popular objective func-
tion used in training neural language models.

as a    nal comment, if we eliminate the role information, r-
lda-conv will be reduced to an id56lm. to demonstrate
the utility of role-based information, we will use an id56lm
over conversations as a baseline model.

3.3. incorporating global topic context
in order to capture long-span context of the conversation, in-
spired by [16], we explicitly include a topic vector representing
all previous dialog turns. we use id44
(lda) to achieve a compact vector-space representation. this
procedure maps a bag-of-words representation of a document
into a low-dimensional vector which is conventionally inter-
preted as a topic representation. for each turn xt, we compute
the lda representation for all previous turns

st = flda (x1, x2, . . . , xt   1)

(8)
where flda (  ) is the lda id136 function as in [15]. then
st is concatenated with hidden layer ht,i to predict xt,i.

(cid:16)

(cid:62)(cid:17)

p(xt,i|x   t,   i   1)     g  

(cid:62)
t,i s

(cid:62)
t ]

[h

.

(9)

this model is named lda-conv. we assume that by includ-
ing st into output layer, the predicted word would be more topi-
cally related with the previous turns, thus allowing the recurrent
part to learn more local context information.

model
baseline
r-conv
lda-conv
r-lda-conv

k
32
256
256
256

h
128
128
128
128

m perplexity
-
-
100
50

54.93
48.89
51.13
46.75

table 2: the best perplexity numbers of the three models on
the development set.

metric
recall@1
recall@2

baseline
0.12
0.22

r-conv
0.15
0.25

lda-conv
0.13
0.24

r-lda-conv
0.16
0.26

table 3: the performance of response ranking with recall@k.

the development set. we use stochastic id119 with
the initial learning rate    = 0.1 to train all the models.

4.2. id74
evaluation on response generation is an emerging research    eld
in data-driven conversation modeling. due to the variety of
possible responses for a given context, it is too conservative
to only compare the generated response with the ground truth.
for a reasonable evaluation, the id165 based evaluation met-
rics including id7 [27] and    id7 [28] require multiple ref-
erences for one given context. one the other hand, there are
indirect evaluation methods, for example, ranking based eval-
uation [7, 10] or qualitative analysis [29].
in this paper, we
use both ranking-based evaluation (recall@k [30]) across all
models, and leave the id165 based evaluation for future work.
to compute the recall@k metric of one model given k, the
model is used to select the top-k candidates, and it is counted
as correct if the ground-truth response is included. in addition
to recall@k, we also evaluate the different models based on
test set perplexity.

to understand the chat conversations requires intensive
knowledge of ubuntu even for human readers. therefore, the
qualitative analysis focuses mainly on the capacity of captur-
ing role information, not the justi   cation of responses as valid
answers to the technical questions.

4.3. quantative evaluation
experiments in this section compare the performance of lda-
conv, r-conv and r-lda-conv to the baseline lstm
system.

4.3.1. perplexity
the best perplexity numbers from the three models are shown
in table 2. r-lda-conv gives the lowest perplexity among
the four models, nearly 8 points improvement over the base-
line model. comparing role vs. global topic, role has a bigger
improvement on perplexity of 11% reduction for role vs. 7%
for lda topic. combining both leads to a 15% reduction in
perplexity. to simplify the comparison, in the following exper-
iments, we only use the best con   guration for each model.

4.3.2. response ranking
the task is to rank the ground-truth response with some
randomly-selected sentences for a given context. for each test
sample, we use the previous t     1 sentences as context, try-

figure 1: the r-lda-conv model. the turn-level lda
feature st is concatenated with word-level hidden layer ht,i and
the output weight matrix wrt is role speci   c.

when incorporating both the global topic vector and the

role factor, the id155 of xt,i is

p(xt,i|x   t,   i   1, rt)     g  ,rt

(cid:62)
t,i s

[h

(cid:62)
t ]

.

(10)

(cid:16)

(cid:62)(cid:17)

we call this model, illustrated in figure 1, r-lda-conv.

4. experiments

we evaluate our model from different aspects on the ubuntu di-
alogue corpus [7], which provides one million two-person con-
versations extracted from ubuntu chat logs. the conversations
are about getting technical support for various ubuntu-related
problems. in this corpus, each conversation contains two users
with different roles, poster: the user in this conversation who
initializes the conversation by proposing a technical problem;
responder: the other user who tries to provide technical sup-
port. for a conversation, we replace the user of each turn with
the corresponding role.

4.1. experimental setup
our models are trained in a subset of the ubuntu dialogue cor-
pus, in which each conversation contains 6 - 20 turns. the re-
sulting data contains 216k conversations in the training set, 10k
conversations in the test set and 13k conversations in the devel-
opment set. we use a twitter tokenizer [25] to parse all utter-
ances in the conversations. the vocabulary is constructed on the
training set with    ltering out low-frequency tokens and replac-
ing them with    unknown   . the vocabulary size is    xed to
include 20k most frequent words. we did not    lter out emoti-
cons, instead we treat them as single tokens.

the lda model is trained using all conversations in train-
ing data, where each conversation is treated as an individual
training instance. we use gensim [26] for both training and in-
ference. there are three hyper-parameters in our models: the
dimension of word representation k, the hidden dimension h
and the number of topics m in lda model. we use grid search
over k, h     {16, 32, 64, 128, 256}, m     {50, 100}, and se-
lect the best combination for each model using the perplexity on

ing to select the best tth sentence. we randomly select 9 turns
from other conversations in the dataset, replacing their role with
the ground truth label. as we noticed that sentences from the
background channel, like    yes   ,    thank you   , could    t almost
all the conversations with various context. to distinguish the
background channel from some contentful sentences, we sam-
ple the negative examples with the ground-truth sentence length
as a constraint     samples with the similar length (   2 words)
are selected as negative examples.

the recall@k are shown in table 3. both r-conv and
lda-conv are better than baseline result, while r-lda-
conv gives the best performance overall. both role factors
and topic feature are acting positively in ranking ground-truth
responses. even though no role information is explicitly used
in the baseline model, the contextual information itself could be
a useful hint to rank the ground-truth response higher. there-
fore, the performance of the baseline model is still better than
random guess. again, role has a bigger effect than topic, and the
combination gives the best results, but differences in recall@k
performance are small.

4.4. qualitative analysis

for qualitative analysis, the best r-lda-conv model is used
to generate role-speci   c responses, and we examined a num-
ber of examples to determine whether the generated response
   t into the expected speaker role. we include two examples in
table 4 and table 5 due to the page limitations. for each case,
we have responses generated for each of the possible roles: a
further question for the poster and a potential solution for the
responder.

as we can see from the context part of table 4, different
roles clearly have different behaviors during the conversation.
ignoring the validity of this potential solution, this generated
response is consistent with our expectation of the respon-
der role. the response of poster seems quite plausible.
the reply of responder is clearly the right style but more
domain information in the topic vector could lead to a more
useful solution.

table 5 shows another example to demonstrate the differ-
ence between the poster and responder roles.
in this
example, the response for the responder is not a potential
solution but a question to the poster. unlike the generated
question for the poster role in the previous example, the
purpose of responder   s question is to ask some further de-
tails in order to provide a simpler solution. the poster   s re-
sponse also    ts well in the local context as well as global topic
of ubuntu installation, claiming the dif   culty of implementing
the poster   s suggestion. at the same time, the generated re-
sponses also show the necessity of incorporating certain domain
knowledge into a domain-speci   c conversation system, which
will be explored in future work.

5. summary

we propose an lstm-based conversation model by incorpo-
rating role factor and topic feature to model different word
distribution for different roles. we present three models: r-
conv, lda-conv and r-lda-conv, by incorporating role
factors and topic features into output layer. we evaluate the
model using both perplexity and response ranking. both r-
conv and lda-conv outperform the baseline model on all
tasks. the model r-lda-conv gives the best performance
by combining the two components. in addition, the generation

results demonstrate the topical coherence and differences in re-
sponses associated with different roles. besides role and topic,
our model structure can be generalized to include more super-
vised information. for future work, we would incorporate su-
pervised domain knowledge into our model to improve the topic
relevance of the response.

role
context
poster

responder
poster

responder

poster

generation
poster
responder

utterance

i have a disk from someone who
hey people .
accidentally overwrote his ext3 partition with a
ntfs partition ...... any tips on how to recover    les
from the erased ext3 partition ? the ntfs partion
was created using     fast     formatting ( i.e. only
the partition table was erased )
you can rebuild a partition table .. brb
is that possible ? how ? and he also started writ-
ing to the ntfs partition , so at least some data will
be lost , hopefully some is still recoverable
at that point , he might as well write it off or pay
a professional to do it
ere4si : is there some guide somewhere on how to
make a live cd using the minimal iso ? it doesn   t
even have a squashfs root    lesystem

can you p me to that ?
    sudo fdisk -l     then use the fstab of the new
permissions . then use that combination of * to
recover backup

ground truth
responder make an iso on usb bootable

table 4: response generation example (providing solution)

role
context
poster

responder
poster
responder
responder

generation
poster

responder

utterance

question : i am currently installing ubuntu . in the
" prepare partitions " dialog box , should i check
both ext3     /    and ext3     /home     to be formatted ?
did you have a previous install of ubuntu on there
no
err kazol_ not mount , write to it i mean
then you can format them both

i know , i don   t know how to do this . bad , even if
i try an encrypted install of ubuntu ... this means
roller failed to mount it , so not the default .
or something similar . are you trying to eject net
crapped on there ?

ground truth
responder

ok thanks

table 5: response generation example (clari   cation of the
problem)

[21] jiwei li, michel galley, chris brockett, jianfeng gao, and bill
arxiv

dolan. a persona-based neural conversation model.
preprint arxiv:1603.06155, 2016.

[22] tomas mikolov, martin kara     t, lukas burget, jan cernock`y,
and sanjeev khudanpur. recurrent neural network based lan-
in interspeech 2010, 11th annual confer-
guage model.
ence of the international speech communication association,
makuhari, chiba, japan, september 26-30, 2010, pages 1045   
1048, 2010.

[23] sepp hochreiter and j  rgen schmidhuber. long short-term mem-

ory. neural computation, 9(8):1735   1780, 1997.

[24] kevin p murphy. machine learning: a probabilistic perspective.

mit press, 2012.

[25] olutobi owoputi, brendan o   connor, chris dyer, kevin gimpel,
nathan schneider, and noah a smith. improved part-of-speech
tagging for online conversational text with word clusters. associ-
ation for computational linguistics, 2013.

[26] radim   reh  u  rek and petr sojka. software framework for topic
modelling with large corpora. in proceedings of the lrec 2010
workshop on new challenges for nlp frameworks, pages 45   
50, valletta, malta, may 2010. elra. http://is.muni.cz/
publication/884893/en.

[27] kishore papineni, salim roukos, todd ward, and wei-jing zhu.
id7: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation.
in proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on association for com-
putational linguistics, pages 311   318. association for computa-
tional linguistics, 2002.

[28] michel galley, chris brockett, alessandro sordoni, yangfeng
ji, michael auli, chris quirk, margaret mitchell, jianfeng gao,
and bill dolan. deltaid7: a discriminative metric for gen-
eration tasks with intrinsically diverse targets. arxiv preprint
arxiv:1506.06863, 2015.

[29] oriol vinyals and quoc le. a neural conversational model.

arxiv preprint arxiv:1506.05869, 2015.

[30] christopher d manning, prabhakar raghavan, hinrich sch  tze,
et al. introduction to information retrieval, volume 1. cambridge
university press cambridge, 2008.

6. references

[1] regina barzilay, michael collins, julia hirschberg, and steve
whittaker. the rules behind roles: identifying speaker role in
radio broadcasts. in aaai/iaai, pages 679   684, 2000.

[2] b hutchinson, b. zhang, and m. ostendorf. unsupervised broad-
cast conversation speaker role labeling. in icassp, pages 5322   
5325, 2010.

[3] b. hutchinson b. zhang, m. a. marin and m. ostendorf. learn-
ieee trans. audio,

ing phrase patterns for text classi   cation.
speech and language processing, 21(6):1180   1189, 2013.

[4] alex marin, bin zhang, and mari ostendorf. detecting forum au-
thority claims in online discussions. in proceedings of the work-
shop on languages in social media, pages 39   47. association for
computational linguistics, 2011.

[5] janet m fuller. the in   uence of speaker roles on discourse marker

use. journal of pragmatics, 35(1):23   45, 2003.

[6] hao wang, zhengdong lu, hang li, and enhong chen. a dataset
in emnlp, pages

for research on short-text conversations.
935   945, 2013.

[7] ryan lowe, nissan pow, iulian serban, and joelle pineau.
the ubuntu dialogue corpus: a large dataset for research
in unstructured multi-turn dialogue systems. arxiv preprint
arxiv:1506.08909, 2015.

[8] alan ritter, colin cherry, and william b dolan. data-driven re-
in proceedings of the con-
sponse generation in social media.
ference on empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 583   593. association for computational linguistics, 2011.
[9] alessandro sordoni, michel galley, michael auli, chris brock-
ett, yangfeng ji, margaret mitchell, jian-yun nie, jianfeng
gao, and bill dolan. a neural network approach to context-
sensitive generation of conversational responses. arxiv preprint
arxiv:1506.06714, 2015.

[10] lifeng shang, zhengdong lu, and hang li.

neural re-
sponding machine for short-text conversation. arxiv preprint
arxiv:1503.02364, 2015.

[11] tsung-hsien wen, milica gasic, nikola mrksic, pei-hao su,
david vandyke, and steve young. semantically conditioned
lstm-based id86 for spoken dialogue
systems. arxiv preprint arxiv:1508.01745, 2015.

[12] yangfeng ji, trevor cohn, lingpeng kong, chris dyer, and jacob
eisenstein. document context language models. arxiv preprint
arxiv:1511.03962, 2015.

[13] rui lin, shujie liu, muyun yang, mu li, ming zhou, and sheng
li. hierarchical recurrent neural network for document modeling.
in proceedings of the 2015 conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing, pages 899   907, 2015.

[14] yi luan, shinji watanabe, and bret harsham. ef   cient learning
for spoken language understanding tasks with id27
based pre-training. in sixteenth annual conference of the inter-
national speech communication association, 2015.

[15] david m blei, andrew y ng, and michael i jordan. latent dirich-
let allocation. the journal of machine learning research, 3:993   
1022, 2003.

[16] tomas mikolov and geoffrey zweig. context dependent recurrent

neural network language model. in slt, pages 234   239, 2012.

[17] g. ji and j. bilmes. multi-speaker id38. in hlt

naacl, 2004.

[18] brian hutchinson. rank and sparsity in language processing.

phd thesis, 2013.

[19] brian hutchinson, mari ostendorf, and maryam fazel. a sparse
plus low-rank exponential language model for limited re-
source scenarios. audio, speech, and language processing,
ieee/acm transactions on, 23(3):494   504, 2015.

[20] songfang huang and steve renals. modeling topic and role in-
formation in meetings using the hierarchical dirichlet process. in
machine learning for multimodal interaction, pages 214   225.
springer, 2008.

