conditional generation and snapshot learning in

neural dialogue systems

tsung-hsien wen, milica ga  si  c, nikola mrk  si  c, lina m. rojas-barahona,

pei-hao su, stefan ultes, david vandyke, steve young

cambridge university engineering department,
trumpington street, cambridge, cb2 1pz, uk

{thw28,mg436,nm480,lmr46,phs26,su259,djv27,sjy11}@cam.ac.uk

6
1
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

0
1

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
5
3
3
0

.

6
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

recently a variety of lstm-based condi-
tional language models (lm) have been ap-
plied across a range of language generation
tasks. in this work we study various model ar-
chitectures and different ways to represent and
aggregate the source information in an end-
to-end neural dialogue system framework. a
method called snapshot learning is also pro-
posed to facilitate learning from supervised
sequential signals by applying a companion
cross-id178 objective function to the condi-
tioning vector. the experimental and analyt-
ical results demonstrate    rstly that competi-
tion occurs between the conditioning vector
and the lm, and the differing architectures
provide different trade-offs between the two.
secondly, the discriminative power and trans-
parency of the conditioning vector is key to
providing both model interpretability and bet-
ter performance. thirdly, snapshot learning
leads to consistent performance improvements
independent of which architecture is used.

1

introduction

recurrent neural network (id56)-based condi-
tional language models (lm) have been shown to
be very effective in solving a number of real world
problems, such as machine translation (mt) (cho
et al., 2014) and image id134 (karpa-
thy and fei-fei, 2015). recently, id56s were ap-
plied to task of generating sentences from an ex-
plicit semantic representation (wen et al., 2015a).
attention-based methods (mei et al., 2016) and
long short-term memory (lstm)-like (hochreiter

and schmidhuber, 1997) gating mechanisms (wen et
al., 2015b) have both been studied to improve gen-
eration quality. although it is now clear that lstm-
based conditional lms can generate plausible nat-
ural language, less effort has been put in compar-
ing the different model architectures. furthermore,
conditional generation models are typically tested
on relatively straightforward tasks conditioned on
a single source (e.g. a sentence or an image) and
where the goal is to optimise a single metric (e.g.
id7). in this work, we study the use of condi-
tional lstms in the generation component of neu-
ral network (nn)-based dialogue systems which de-
pend on multiple conditioning sources and optimis-
ing multiple metrics.

neural conversational agents (vinyals and le,
2015; shang et al., 2015) are direct extensions of
the sequence-to-sequence model (sutskever et al.,
2014) in which a conversation is cast as a source to
target transduction problem. however, these mod-
els are still far from real world applications be-
cause they lack any capability for supporting domain
speci   c tasks, for example, being able to interact
with databases (sukhbaatar et al., 2015; yin et al.,
2016) and aggregate useful information into their re-
sponses. recent work by wen et al. (2016a), how-
ever, proposed an end-to-end trainable neural dia-
logue system that can assist users to complete spe-
ci   c tasks. their system used both distributed and
symbolic representations to capture user intents, and
these collectively condition a nn language genera-
tor to generate system responses. due to the diver-
sity of the conditioning information sources, the best
way to represent and combine them is non-trivial.

in wen et al. (2016a), the objective function for
learning the dialogue policy and language generator
depends solely on the likelihood of the output sen-
tences. however, this sequential supervision signal
may not be informative enough to learn a good con-
ditioning vector representation resulting in a gener-
ation process which is dominated by the lm. this
can often lead to inappropriate system outputs.

in this paper, we therefore also investigate the use
of snapshot learning which attempts to mitigate this
problem by heuristically applying companion super-
vision signals to a subset of the conditioning vector.
this idea is similar to deeply supervised nets (lee
et al., 2015) in which the    nal cost from the out-
put layer is optimised together with the companion
signals generated from each intermediary layer. we
have found that snapshot learning offers several ben-
e   ts: (1) it consistently improves performance; (2) it
learns discriminative and robust feature representa-
tions and alleviates the vanishing gradient problem;
(3) it appears to learn transparent and interpretable
subspaces of the conditioning vector.

2 related work

machine learning approaches to task-oriented di-
alogue system design have cast
the problem as
a partially observable markov decision process
(pomdp) (young et al., 2013) with the aim of
using reinforcement
learning (rl) to train dia-
logue policies online through interactions with real
users (ga  si  c et al., 2013).
in order to make rl
tractable, the state and action space must be care-
fully designed (young et al., 2010) and the un-
derstanding (henderson et al., 2014; mrk  si  c et al.,
2015) and generation (wen et al., 2015b; wen et al.,
2016b) modules were assumed available or trained
standalone on supervised corpora. due to the under-
lying hand-coded semantic representation (traum,
1999), the conversation is far from natural and the
comprehension capability is limited. this motivates
the use of neural networks to model dialogues from
end to end as a conditional generation problem.

interest in generating natural language using nns
can be attributed to the success of id56 lms for
large vocabulary id103 (mikolov et al.,
2010; mikolov et al., 2011). sutskever et al. (2011)
showed that plausible sentences can be obtained by

sampling characters one by one from the output
layer of an id56. by conditioning an lstm on a
sequence of characters, graves (2013) showed that
machines can synthesise handwriting indistinguish-
able from that of a human. later on, this conditional
generation idea has been tried in several research
   elds, for example, generating image captions by
conditioning an id56 on a convolutional neural net-
work (id98) output (karpathy and fei-fei, 2015;
xu et al., 2015); translating a source to a target lan-
guage by conditioning a decoder lstm on top of an
encoder lstm (cho et al., 2014; bahdanau et al.,
2015); or generating natural language by condition-
ing on a symbolic semantic representation (wen et
al., 2015b; mei et al., 2016). among all these meth-
ods, attention-based mechanisms (bahdanau et al.,
2015; hermann et al., 2015; ling et al., 2016) have
been shown to be very effective improving perfor-
mance using a dynamic source aggregation strategy.
to model dialogue as conditional generation,
a sequence-to-sequence learning (sutskever et al.,
2014) framework has been adopted. vinyals and le
(2015) trained the same model on several conversa-
tion datasets and showed that the model can gener-
ate plausible conversations. however, serban et al.
(2015b) discovered that the majority of the gener-
ated responses are generic due to the maximum like-
lihood criterion, which was latter addressed by li
et al. (2016a) using a maximum mutual information
decoding strategy. furthermore, the lack of a con-
sistent system persona was also studied in li et al.
(2016b). despite its demonstrated potential, a ma-
jor barrier for this line of research is data collection.
many works (lowe et al., 2015; serban et al., 2015a;
dodge et al., 2016) have investigated conversation
datasets for developing chat bot or qa-like general
purpose conversation agents. however, collecting
data to develop goal oriented dialogue systems that
can help users to complete a task in a speci   c do-
main remains dif   cult. in a recent work by wen et
al. (2016a), this problem was addressed by design-
ing an online, parallel version of wizard-of-oz data
collection (kelley, 1984) which allows large scale
and cheap in-domain conversation data to be col-
lected using amazon mechanical turk. an nn-
based dialogue model was also proposed to learn
from the collected dataset and was shown to be able
to assist human subjects to complete speci   c tasks.

snapshot learning can be viewed as a special form
of weak supervision (also known as distant- or self
supervision) (craven and kumlien, 1999; snow et
al., 2004), in which supervision signals are heuristi-
cally labelled by matching unlabelled corpora with
entities or attributes in a structured database. it has
been widely applied to id36 (mintz et
al., 2009) and information extraction (hoffmann et
al., 2011) in which facts from a knowledge base (e.g.
freebase) were used as objectives to train classi   ers.
recently, self supervision was also used in mem-
ory networks (hill et al., 2016) to improve the dis-
criminative power of memory attention. conceptu-
ally, snapshot learning is related to curriculum learn-
ing (bengio et al., 2009). instead of learning eas-
ier examples before dif   cult ones, snapshot learning
creates an easier target for each example. in prac-
tice, snapshot learning is similar to deeply super-
vised nets (lee et al., 2015) in which companion ob-
jectives are generated from intermediary layers and
optimised altogether with the output objective.
3 neural dialogue system
the testbed for this work is a neural network-based
task-oriented dialogue system proposed by wen et
al. (2016a). the model casts dialogue as a source
to target sequence transduction problem (modelled
by a sequence-to-sequence architecture (sutskever
et al., 2014)) augmented with the dialogue his-
tory (modelled by a belief tracker (henderson et
al., 2014)) and the current database search outcome
(modelled by a database operator). the model con-
sists of both encoder and decoder modules. the de-
tails of each module are given below.

3.1 encoder module
at each turn t, the goal of the encoder is to produce
a distributed representation of the system action mt,
which is then used to condition a decoder to gen-
erate the next system response in skeletal form1. it
consists of four submodules: intent network, belief
tracker, database operator, and policy network.
intent network
the intent network takes a se-
quence of tokens1 and converts it into a sentence em-
bedding representing the user intent using an lstm
1delexicalisation: slots and values are replaced by generic
keywords like chinese food are replaced by

tokens (e.g.
[v.food] [s.food] to allow weight sharing.

network. the hidden layer of the lstm at the last
encoding step zt is taken as the representation. as
mentioned in wen et al. (2016a), this representation
can be viewed as a distributed version of the speech
act (traum, 1999) used in traditional systems.
belief trackers
in addition to the intent network,
the neural dialogue system uses a set of slot-based
belief trackers (henderson et al., 2014; mrk  si  c et al.,
2015) to track user requests. by taking each user in-
put as new evidence, the task of a belief tracker is
to maintain a multinomial distribution p over values
v     vs for each informable slot s2, and a binary
distribution for each requestable slot2. these prob-
t are called belief states of the
ability distributions ps
system. the belief states ps
t , together with the intent
vector zt, can be viewed as the system   s comprehen-
sion of the user requests up to turn t.
database operator based on the belief states ps
t ,
a db query is formed by taking the union of the
maximum values of each informable slot. a vector
xt representing different degrees of matching in the
db (no match, 1 match, ... or more than 5 matches)
is produced by counting the number of matched enti-
ties and expressing it as a 6-bin 1-hot encoding. if xt
is not zero, an associated entity pointer is maintained
which identi   es one of the matching db entities se-
lected at random. the entity pointer is updated if the
current entity no longer matches the search criteria;
otherwise it stays the same.
policy network based on the vectors zt, ps
t , and
xt from the above three modules, the policy network
combines them into a single action vector mt by a
three-way matrix transformation,

mt = tanh(wzmzt + wxmxt +(cid:80)

(1)

pmps
t )

s   g ws

pm, and wxm are param-

where matrices wzm, ws
eters and g is the domain ontology.
3.2 decoder module
conditioned on the system action vector mt pro-
vided by the encoder module, the decoder mod-
ule uses a conditional lstm lm to generate the
required system output token by token in skeletal
form1. the    nal system response can then be formed
2informable slots are slots that users can use to constrain the
search, such as food type or price range; requestable slots are
slots that users can ask a value for, such as phone number. this
information is speci   ed in the domain ontology.

(a) language model type lstm

(b) memory type lstm

(c) hybrid type lstm

figure 1: three different conditional generation architectures.

by substituting the actual values of the database en-
tries into the skeletal sentence structure.
3.2.1 conditional generation network
in this paper we study and analyse three different
variants of lstm-based conditional generation ar-
chitectures:
language model type the most straightforward
way to condition the lstm network on additional
source information is to concatenate the condition-
ing vector mt together with the input word embed-
ding wj and previous hidden layer hj   1,

             ij

fj
oj
  cj

             =

             sigmoid

sigmoid
sigmoid
tanh

             w4n,3n

       mt

wj
hj   1

      

cj = fj (cid:12) cj   1 + ij (cid:12)   cj
hj = oj (cid:12) tanh(cj)

where index j is the generation step, n is the hidden
layer size, ij, fj, oj     [0, 1]n are input, forget, and
output gates respectively,   cj and cj are proposed cell
value and true cell value at step j, and w4n,3n are
the model parameters. the model is shown in fig-
ure 1a. since it does not differ signi   cantly from the
original lstm, we call it the language model type
(lm) conditional generation network.
memory type
the memory type (mem) condi-
tional generation network was introduced by wen et
al. (2015b), shown in figure 1b, in which the condi-
tioning vector mt is governed by a standalone read-
ing gate rj. this reading gate decides how much in-
formation should be read from the conditioning vec-
tor and directly writes it into the memory cell cj,

             ij

fj
oj
rj

             =

             sigmoid

sigmoid
sigmoid
sigmoid

             w4n,3n

       mt

wj
hj   1

      

  cj = tanh(cid:0)wc(wj     hj   1)(cid:1)

cj = fj (cid:12) cj   1 + ij (cid:12)   cj + rj (cid:12) mt

hj = oj (cid:12) tanh(cj)

where wc is another weight matrix to learn. the
idea behind this is that the model isolates the con-
ditioning vector from the lm so that the model has
more    exibility to learn to trade off between the two.
hybrid type continuing with the same idea as the
memory type network, a complete separation of con-
ditioning vector and lm (except for the gate con-
trolling the signals) is provided by the hybrid type
network shown in figure 1c,

             ij

fj
oj
rj

             =
             sigmoid
             w4n,3n
       mt
  cj = tanh(cid:0)wc(wj     hj   1)(cid:1)

sigmoid
sigmoid
sigmoid

wj
hj   1

      

cj = fj (cid:12) cj   1 + ij (cid:12)   cj

hj = oj (cid:12) tanh(cj) + rj (cid:12) mt

this model was motivated by the fact that long-term
dependency is not needed for the conditioning vec-
tor because we apply this information at every step j
anyway. the decoupling of the conditioning vector
and the lm is attractive because it leads to better in-
terpretability of the results and provides the potential
to learn a better conditioning vector and lm.

3.2.2 attention and belief representation
attention an attention-based mechanism provides
an effective approach for aggregating multiple infor-
mation sources for prediction tasks. like wen et al.

(2016a), we explore the use of an attention mecha-
nism to combine the tracker belief states in which
the policy network in equation 1 is modi   ed as

mj

t = tanh(wzmzt + wxmxt +(cid:80)
tanh(cid:0)wr    (vt     ps
s = softmax(cid:0)r

where the attention weights   j

  j

(cid:124)

s   g   j

sws

pmps
t )

s are calculated by,

j   1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

t     wt

j     ht

where vt = zt + xt and matrix wr and vector r are
parameters to learn.
belief representation the effect of different be-
lief state representations on the end performance are
also studied. for user informable slots, the full belief
state ps
t is the original state containing all categori-
cal values; the summary belief state contains only
three components: the summed value of all categor-
ical probabilities, the id203 that the user said
they    don   t care    about this slot and the probabil-
ity that the slot has not been mentioned. for user
requestable slots, on the other hand, the full belief
state is the same as the summary belief state because
the slot values are binary rather than categorical.

3.3 snapshot learning
learning conditional generation models from se-
quential supervision signals can be dif   cult, because
it requires the model to learn both long-term word
dependencies and potentially distant source encod-
ing functions. to mitigate this dif   culty, we in-
troduce a novel method called snapshot learning
t     [0, 1]d,
to create a vector of binary labels   j
d < dim(mj
t ) as the snapshot of the remaining part
of the output sentence tt,j:|tt| from generation step
j. each element of the snapshot vector is an indica-
tor function of a certain event that will happen in the
future, which can be obtained either from the sys-
tem response or dialogue context at training time. a
companion cross id178 error is then computed to
t     mj
force a subset of the conditioning vector   mj
to be close to the snapshot vector,

t

lss(  ) =    (cid:80)

t

(cid:80)

j e[h(  j

t ,   mj

t )]

(2)

where h(  ) is the cross id178 function,   j
t and   mj
t
are elements of vectors   j
t , respectively. in
order to make the tanh activations of   mj
t compat-
ible with the 0-1 snapshot labels, we squeeze each

t and   mj

figure 2: the idea of snapshot learning. the snap-
shot vector was trained with additional supervisions
on a set of indicator functions heuristically labelled
using the system response.

value of   mj
computing the cost.

t by adding 1 and dividing by 2 before

the indicator functions we use in this work have
two forms: (1) whether a particular slot value (e.g.,
[v.food]1) is going to occur, and (2) whether the sys-
tem has offered a venue3, as shown in figure 2. the
offer label in the snapshot is produced by checking
the delexicalised name token ([v.name]) in the en-
tire dialogue. if it has occurred, every label in sub-
sequent turns is labelled with 1. otherwise it is la-
belled with 0. to create snapshot targets for a partic-
ular slot value, the output sentence is matched with
the corresponding delexicalised token turn by turn,
per generation step. at each generation step, the tar-
get is labelled with 0 if that delexicalised token has
been generated; otherwise it is set to 1. however, for
the models without attention, the targets per turn are
set to the same because the condition vector will not
be able to learn the dynamically changing behaviour
without attention.

4 experiments
dataset
the dataset used in this work was col-
lected in the wizard-of-oz online data collection de-
scribed by wen et al. (2016a), in which the task of
the system is to assist users to    nd a restaurant in
cambridge, uk area. there are three informable
slots (food, pricerange, area) that users can use to
constrain the search and six requestable slots (ad-
dress, phone, postcode plus the three informable

3details of the speci   c application used in this study are

given in section 4 below.

architecture belief

success(%) slotmatch(%)

t5-id7

t1-id7

belief state representation

lm
lm

full
summary
conditional architecture
summary
summary
summary

lm
mem
hybrid

72.6 / 74.5
74.5 / 76.5

52.1 / 60.3
57.4 / 61.2

0.207 / 0.229
0.221 / 0.231

0.216 / 0.238
0.227 / 0.240

74.5 / 76.5
75.5 / 77.5
76.1 / 79.2

57.4 / 61.2
59.2 / 61.3
52.4 / 60.6

0.221 / 0.231
0.222 / 0.232
0.202 / 0.228

0.227 / 0.240
0.231 / 0.243
0.212 / 0.237

attention-based model

lm
mem
hybrid

summary
summary
summary

79.4 / 78.2
76.5 / 80.2
79.0 / 81.8

60.6 / 60.2
57.4 / 61.0
56.2 / 60.5

0.228 / 0.231
0.220 / 0.229
0.214 / 0.227

0.239 / 0.241
0.228 / 0.239
0.224 / 0.240

table 1: performance comparison of different model architectures, belief state representations, and snapshot
learning. the numbers to the left and right of the / sign are learning without and with snapshot, respectively.
the model with the best performance on a particular metric (column) is shown in bold face.

l(  \b) =    (cid:80)

(cid:80)

slots) that the user can ask a value for once a restau-
rant has been offered. there are 676 dialogues in the
dataset (including both    nished and un   nished dia-
logues) and approximately 2750 turns in total. the
database contains 99 unique restaurants.
training the training procedure was divided into
two stages. firstly, the belief tracker parameters
  b were pre-trained using cross id178 errors be-
tween tracker labels and predictions. having    xed
the tracker parameters, the remaining parts of the
model   \b are trained using the cross id178 errors
from the generation network lm,

t

j) +   lss(  )

j, pt

j h(yt

j and pt

(3)
where yt
j are output token targets and predic-
tions respectively, at turn t of output step j, lss(  )
is the snapshot cost from equation 2, and    is the
tradeoff parameter in which we set to 1 for all mod-
els trained with snapshot learning. we treated each
dialogue as a batch and used stochastic gradient de-
scent with a small l2 regularisation term to train the
model. the collected corpus was partitioned into
a training, validation, and testing sets in the ratio
3:1:1. early stopping was implemented based on the
validation set considering only lm log-likelihoods.
gradient clipping was set to 1. the hidden layer
sizes were set to 50, and the weights were randomly
initialised between -0.3 and 0.3 including word em-
beddings. the vocabulary size is around 500 for
both input and output,
in which rare words and
words that can be delexicalised have been removed.

decoding in order to compare models trained with
different recipes rather than decoding strategies, we
decode all the trained models with the average log
id203 of tokens in the sentence. we applied
id125 with a beamwidth equal to 10, the
search stops when an end-of-sentence token is gen-
erated. in order to consider language variability, we
ran decoding until 5 candidates were obtained and
performed evaluation on them.
metrics we compared models trained with differ-
ent recipes by performing a corpus-based evaluation
in which the model is used to predict each system
response in the held-out test set. three evaluation
metrics were used: id7 score (on top-1 and top-
5 candidates) (papineni et al., 2002), slot matching
rate and objective task success rate (su et al., 2015).
the dialogue is marked as successful if both: (1)
the offered entity matches the task that was speci-
   ed to the user, and (2) the system answered all the
associated information requests (e.g. what is the ad-
dress?) from the user. the slot matching rate is the
percentage of delexicalised tokens (e.g. [s.food] and
[v.area]1) appear in the candidate also appear in the
reference. we computed the id7 scores on the
skeletal sentence forms before substituting with the
actual entity values. all the results were averaged
over 10 random initialised networks.
results table 1 shows the evaluation results. the
numbers to the left and right of each table cell are the
same model trained w/o and w/ snapshot learning.

(a) hybrid lstm w/o snapshot learning

(b) hybrid lstm w/ snapshot learning

figure 3: learned attention heat maps over trackers. the    rst three columns in each    gure are informable
slot trackers and the rest are requestable slot trackers. the generation model is the hybrid type lstm.

the    rst observation is that snapshot learning con-
sistently improves on most metrics regardless of the
model architecture. this is especially true for id7
scores. we think this may be attributed to the more
discriminative conditioning vector learned through
the snapshot method, which makes the learning of
the conditional lm easier.

in the    rst block belief state representation, we
compare the effect of two different belief represen-
tations. as can be seen, using a succinct represen-
tation is better (summary>full) because the iden-
tity of each categorical value in the belief state does
not help when the generation decisions are done in
skeletal form. in fact, the full belief state representa-
tion may encourage the model to learn incorrect co-
adaptation among features when the data is scarce.
in the conditional architecture block, we com-
pare the three different conditional generation archi-
tectures as described in section 3.2.1. this result
shows that the language model type (lm) and mem-
ory type (mem) networks perform better in terms of
id7 score and slot matching rate, while the hybrid
type (hybrid) networks achieve higher task success.
this is probably due to the degree of separation be-
tween the lm and conditioning vector: a coupling
approach (lm, mem) sacri   ces the conditioning vec-
tor but learns a better lm and higher id7; while
a complete separation (hybrid) learns a better condi-
tioning vector and offers a higher task success.

lastly,

in the attention-based model block we
train the three architectures with the attention mech-

model
hybrid, full
hybrid, summary
+ att.

ij

0.567
0.539
0.540

fj

0.502
0.540
0.559

rj/oj
0.405
0.428
0.459

table 2: average activation of gates on test set.

anism and compare them again. firstly, the char-
acteristics of the three models we observed above
also hold for attention-based models. secondly, we
found that the attention mechanism improves all
the three architectures on task success rate but not
id7 scores. this is probably due to the limita-
tions of using id165 based metrics like id7 to
evaluate the generation quality (stent et al., 2005).

5 model analysis

gate activations we    rst studied the average ac-
tivation of each individual gate in the models by av-
eraging them when running generation on the test
set. we analysed the hybrid models because their
reading gate to output gate activation ratio (rj/oj)
shows clear tradeoff between the lm and the con-
ditioning vector components. as can be seen in ta-
ble 2, we found that the average forget gate activa-
tions (fj) and the ratio of the reading gate to the out-
put gate activation (rj/oj) have strong correlations
to performance: a better performance (row 3>row
2>row 1) seems to come from models that can learn
a longer word dependency (higher forget gate ft ac-
tivations) and a better conditioning vector (therefore

(a)

(b)

figure 4: two example responses generated from the hybrid model trained with snapshot and attention.
each line represents a neuron that detects a particular snapshot event.

higher reading to output gate ratio rj/oj).
learned attention
we have visualised the
learned attention heat map of models trained with
and without snapshot learning in figure 3. the at-
tention is on both the informable slot trackers (   rst
three columns) and the requestable slot trackers (the
other columns). we found that the model trained
with snapshot learning (figure 3b) seems to pro-
duce a more accurate and discriminative attention
heat map comparing to the one trained without it
(figure 3a). this may contribute to the better perfor-
mance achieved by the snapshot learning approach.
snapshot neurons as mentioned earlier, snap-
shot learning forces a subspace of the condition-
ing vector   mj
t to become discriminative and inter-
pretable. two example generated sentences together
with the snapshot neuron activations are shown in
figure 4. as can be seen, when generating words
one by one, the neuron activations were changing
to detect different events they were assigned by the
snapshot training signals: e.g. in figure 4b the light
blue and orange neurons switched their domination
role when the token [v.address] was generated; the
offered neuron is in a high activation state in fig-
ure 4b because the system was offering a venue,
while in figure 4a it is not activated because the sys-
tem was still helping the user to    nd a venue. more
examples can be found in the appendix.

6 conclusion and future work

this paper has investigated different conditional
generation architectures and a novel method called
snapshot learning to improve response generation in
a neural dialogue system framework. the results
showed three major    ndings. firstly, although the
hybrid type model did not rank highest on all met-
rics, it is nevertheless preferred because it achieved
the highest task success and also it provided more in-
terpretable results. secondly, snapshot learning pro-
vided gains on virtually all metrics regardless of the
architecture used. the analysis suggested that the
bene   t of snapshot learning mainly comes from the
more discriminative and robust subspace represen-
tation learned from the heuristically labelled com-
panion signals, which in turn facilitates optimisation
of the    nal target objective. lastly, the results sug-
gested that by making a complex system more inter-
pretable at different levels not only helps our under-
standing but also leads to the highest success rates.
however, there is still much work left to do. this
work focused on conditional generation architec-
tures and snapshot learning in the scenario of gen-
erating dialogue responses. it would be very helpful
if the same comparison could be conducted in other
application domains such as machine translation or
image id134 so that a wider view of the
effectiveness of these approaches can be assessed.

acknowledgments
tsung-hsien wen and david vandyke are supported
by toshiba research europe ltd, cambridge re-
search laboratory.

references
dzmitry bahdanau, kyunghyun cho, and yoshua ben-
2015. id4 by jointly

gio.
learning to align and translate. in iclr.

yoshua bengio, j  er  ome louradour, ronan collobert, and
jason weston. 2009. curriculum learning. in icml.
kyunghyun cho, bart van merrienboer, c   aglar g  ulc  ehre,
fethi bougares, holger schwenk, and yoshua bengio.
2014. learning phrase representations using id56
encoder-decoder for id151. in
emnlp.

mark craven and johan kumlien. 1999. constructing
biological knowledge bases by extracting information
from text sources. in ismb.

jesse dodge, andreea gane, xiang zhang, antoine bor-
des, sumit chopra, alexander miller, arthur szlam,
and jason weston.
evaluating prerequi-
site qualities for learning end-to-end id71.
iclr.

2016.

milica ga  si  c, catherine breslin, matthew henderson,
dongho kim, martin szummer, blaise thomson, pir-
ros tsiakoulis, and steve young. 2013. on-line policy
optimisation of bayesian spoken dialogue systems via
human interaction. in icassp.

alex graves. 2013. generating sequences with recurrent

neural networks. arxiv preprint:1308.0850.

matthew henderson, blaise thomson, and steve young.
2014. word-based dialog state tracking with recurrent
neural networks. in sigdial.

karl moritz hermann, tom  as kocisk  y, edward grefen-
stette, lasse espeholt, will kay, mustafa suleyman,
and phil blunsom. 2015. teaching machines to read
and comprehend. in nips.

felix hill, antoine bordes, sumit chopra, and jason we-
ston. 2016. the goldilocks principle: reading chil-
dren   s books with explicit memory representations. in
iclr.

sepp hochreiter and j  urgen schmidhuber. 1997. long

short-term memory. neural computation.

raphael hoffmann, congle zhang, xiao ling, luke
zettlemoyer, and daniel s. weld. 2011. knowledge-
based weak supervision for information extraction of
overlapping relations. in acl.

andrej karpathy and li fei-fei. 2015. deep visual-
semantic alignments for generating image descrip-
tions. in cvpr.

john f. kelley. 1984. an iterative design methodology
for user-friendly natural language of   ce information
applications. acm transaction on information sys-
tems.

chen-yu lee, saining xie, patrick gallagher, zhengyou
zhang, and zhuowen tu. 2015. deeply-supervised
nets. in aistats.

jiwei li, michel galley, chris brockett, jianfeng gao,
and bill dolan. 2016a. a diversity-promoting ob-
jective function for neural conversation models.
in
naacl-hlt.

jiwei li, michel galley, chris brockett, jianfeng gao,
and bill dolan. 2016b. a persona-based neural con-
versation model. arxiv perprint:1603.06155.

wang ling, edward grefenstette, karl moritz hermann,
tom  as kocisk  y, andrew senior, fumin wang, and
phil blunsom. 2016. latent predictor networks for
code generation. arxiv preprint:1603.06744.

ryan lowe, nissan pow,

iulian serban, and joelle
pineau. 2015. the ubuntu dialogue corpus: a large
dataset for research in unstructured multi-turn dia-
logue systems. in sigdial.

hongyuan mei, mohit bansal, and matthew r. walter.
2016. what to talk about and how? selective gen-
eration using lstms with coarse-to-   ne alignment. in
naacl.

tom  a  s mikolov, martin kara   t, luk  a  s burget, jan
  cernock  y, and sanjeev khudanpur. 2010. recurrent
neural network based language model. in interspeech.
tom  a  s mikolov, stefan kombrink, luk  a  s burget, jan h.
  cernock  y, and sanjeev khudanpur. 2011. exten-
sions of recurrent neural network language model. in
icassp.

mike mintz, steven bills, rion snow, and dan jurafsky.
2009. distant supervision for id36 with-
out labeled data. in acl.

nikola mrk  si  c, diarmuid   o s  eaghdha, blaise thomson,
milica ga  si  c, pei-hao su, david vandyke, tsung-
hsien wen, and steve young. 2015. multi-domain
dialog state tracking using recurrent neural net-
works. in acl.

kishore papineni, salim roukos, todd ward, and wei-
jing zhu. 2002. id7: a method for automatic evalua-
tion of machine translation. in acl.

iulian vlad serban, ryan lowe, laurent charlin, and
joelle pineau.
2015a. a survey of available cor-
pora for building data-driven dialogue systems. arxiv
preprint:1512.05742.

iulian vlad serban, alessandro sordoni, yoshua bengio,
aaron c. courville, and joelle pineau. 2015b. hier-
archical neural network generative models for movie
dialogues. in aaai.

steve young, milica ga  si  c, simon keizer, franc  ois
mairesse, jost schatzmann, blaise thomson, and kai
yu. 2010. the hidden information state model: a
practical framework for pomdp-based spoken dialogue
management. computer, speech and language.

steve young, milica ga  si  c, blaise thomson, and ja-
son d. williams. 2013. pomdp-based statistical spo-
ken id71: a review. proceedings of ieee.

lifeng shang, zhengdong lu, and hang li. 2015. neu-
ral responding machine for short-text conversation. in
acl.

rion snow, daniel jurafsky, and andrew y. ng. 2004.
learning syntactic patterns for automatic hypernym
discovery. in nips.

amanda stent, matthew marge, and mohit singhai.
2005. evaluating evaluation methods for generation
in the presence of variation. in cicling 2005.

pei-hao su, david vandyke, milica gasic, dongho kim,
nikola mrksic, tsung-hsien wen, and steve j. young.
2015. learning from real users: rating dialogue suc-
cess with neural networks for id23
in spoken dialogue systems. in interspeech.

sainbayar sukhbaatar, arthur szlam, jason weston, and
rob fergus. 2015. end-to-end memory networks. in
nips.

ilya sutskever, james martens, and geoffrey e. hinton.
2011. generating text with recurrent neural networks.
in icml.

ilya sutskever, oriol vinyals, and quoc v. le. 2014.
sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
in nips.

david r. traum, 1999. foundations of rational agency,

chapter speech acts for dialogue agents. springer.

oriol vinyals and quoc v. le. 2015. a neural conversa-

tional model. in icml deep learning workshop.

tsung-hsien wen, milica ga  si  c, dongho kim, nikola
mrk  si  c, pei-hao su, david vandyke, and steve
young. 2015a. stochastic language generation in di-
alogue using recurrent neural networks with convolu-
tional sentence reranking. in sigdial.

tsung-hsien wen, milica ga  si  c, nikola mrk  si  c, pei-hao
su, david vandyke, and steve young. 2015b. seman-
tically conditioned lstm-based natural language gener-
ation for spoken dialogue systems. in emnlp.

tsung-hsien wen, milica ga  si  c, nikola mrk  si  c, pei-hao
su, stefan ultes, david vandyke, and steve young.
2016a. a network-based end-to-end trainable task-
oriented dialogue system. arxiv preprint:1604.04562.
tsung-hsien wen, milica ga  si  c, nikola mrk  si  c, pei-hao
su, david vandyke, and steve young. 2016b. multi-
domain neural network language generation for spo-
ken dialogue systems. in naacl-hlt.

kelvin xu, jimmy ba, ryan kiros, kyunghyun cho,
aaron c. courville, ruslan salakhutdinov, richard s.
zemel, and yoshua bengio. 2015. show, attend and
tell: neural image id134 with visual at-
tention. in icml.

pengcheng yin, zhengdong lu, hang li, and ben kao.
2016. neural enquirer: learning to query tables. in
ijcai.

appendix: more snapshot neuron visualisation

figure 5: more example visualisation of snapshot neurons and different generated responses.

