scholarly communication 

carl bergstrom 

eigenfactor
measuring the value and prestige of scholarly journals 

in 1927, two chemists at pomona college 

published an article in science, proposing 
that librarians could use data about citation 
rates  to  select  appropriate  journals  for  a 
small  library  collection.1  this  idea  has  had 
an enormous in   uence on the structure and 
practice of scienti   c communication. today, 
citation analysis is ubiquitous in evaluating 
papers,  researchers,  journals,  departments, 
and    elds. not only do librarians use citation 
data  in  selecting  journal  subscriptions,  but 
researchers use them when deciding where 
to submit their manuscripts, funding bodies 
in  evaluating  grant  proposals,  and  tenure 
committees  in  deciding  tenure  cases.2  but 
as the in   uence of citation data has grown, 
so has criticism of its use. much of this criti  
cism is justi   ed; when evaluating individual 
papers  or  researchers,  there  is  clearly  no 
substitute for reading and understanding the 
work.  however,  some  questions   such  as 
bibliometric analysis of the relative in    uence 
of  the  full  contents  of  a  journal   can  only 
be  answered  by  a  large  scale  quantitative 
approach. for these questions, citation data 
can be useful, and we should make the best 
possible use of it. 

the scienti   c literature forms a network 
of scholarly articles, connected by citations.3 
each  connection  in  this  network   that  is, 
each citation   re   ects the assessment of an 
individual scholar regarding which papers are 
interesting and relevant to his or her work. 
thus contained within the vast network of 
scholarly  citations  is  the  collective  wisdom 
of hundreds of thousands of authors. my col  
leagues4 and i have developed a way to use 
the network structure of citations to improve 

on simple citation counts in measuring the 
scienti    c in   uence of academic publications. 
at  our  web  site  www.eigenfactor.org,  we 
report  these  measures  for  the  nearly  8,000 
publications indexed by thompson scientif  
ic   s journal citation reports (jcr) as well as 
for the approximately 110,000 other journals, 
books, newspapers, and other reference items 
that are referred to by these publications. 

how it works 
our  approach  is  to  rank  journals  much  as 
google  ranks  web  pages.  while  google 
uses the network of hyperlinks on the web, 
we  use  citations  in  the  academic  literature 
as tallied by jcr. by this approach, we aim 
to  identity  the  most     in    uential     journals, 
where  a  journal  is  considered  to  be  in    u  
ential if it is cited often by other in    uential 
journals. while this might sound hopelessly 
circular,  it  is  not:  we  can  iteratively  calcu  
late  the  importance  of  each  journal  in  the 
citation  network  by  a  simple  mathematical 
algorithm. 

this iterative ranking scheme, which we 
call eigenfactor, accounts for the fact that a 
single  citation  from  a  high  quality  journal 
may be more valuable than multiple citations 
from peripheral publications. we measure the 
importance of a citation by the in    uence of 
the citing journal divided by the total number 
of citations appearing in that journal. this 
corrects for differences across disciplines and 

carl bergstrom is associate professor in the department 
of  biology  at  the  university  of washington,  e-mail: 
cbergst@u.washington.edu 
   2007 carl bergstrom 

c&rl news 

may 2007

314

journals in the propensity to cite other papers. 
for example, a citation from a review article 
that has cursory references to large numbers 
of papers counts for less than a citation from a 
research article that cites only papers that are 
essentially related to its own argument. 

eigenfactor measures the total in    uence 
of  a  journal  on  the  scholarly  literature  or, 
comparably, the total value provided by all 
of the articles published in that journal in a 
year. this seems the appropriate metric for 
making subscription decisions. all else equal, 
larger journals will have more citations and 
larger eigenfactor scores and will be visited 
more often by researchers. if, on the other 
hand, one wants to estimate the importance 
of  an  article  by  the  company  it  keeps,  the 
size of the journal in which it is published 
is not relevant. instead one would want to 
measure the average in   uence of articles ap  
pearing in the same journal. the measure that 
we use as the article in   uence for a journal 
is  proportional  to  the  eigenfactor  divided 
by  the  number  of  articles.  this  measure  is 
more  directly  comparable  to  isi   s  familiar 
impact factor. 

in the sidebar below, we list the top ten 
nonreview journals in the sciences, ranked 
by the article in    uence. 

the article in   uence is scaled with respect 
to a mean of 1.00; thus science has more than 
17 times the in   uence of the mean journal in 
thompson scienti   c   s isi database. 

 

in addition to ranking the scholarly jour  
nals listed by isi, we evaluate the importance 
of other reference materials to 
these  scholarly  journals.  for 
example,  we  can  see  which 
newspapers  have  the  great  
est in   uence on the scholarly 
literature:  new  york  times, 
the  guardian,  wall  street 
journal,  washington  post, 
london times, miami herald, 
financial  times,  le  monde, 
boston globe, and los angeles 
times. 

we can view the eigenfac  
tor  score  of  a  journal  as  a 

rough estimate of how often a journal will be 
used by scholars. the eigenfactor algorithm 
corresponds to a simple model of research 
in  which  readers  follow  citations  as  they 
move from journal to journal. the algorithm 
effectively calculates the trajectory of a hy  
pothetical    random researcher    who behaves 
as follows. our random researcher begins by 
going to the library and selecting a journal 
article at random. after reading the article, she 
selects at random one of the citations from the 
article. she then proceeds to the cited work 
and reads a random article there. she selects 
a new citation from this article, and follows 
that citation to her next journal volume. the 
researcher does this ad in   nitum. since we 
lack  the  time  to  carry  out  this  experiment 
in practice, eigenfactor uses mathematics to 
simulate this process. 

because  our  random  researcher  moves 
among journals according the citation network 
that connects them, the frequency with which 
she visits each journal gives us a measure of 
that journal   s importance within network of 
academic citations. moreover, if real research  
ers    nd a sizable fraction of the articles that 
they  read  by  following  citation  chains,  the 
amount of time that our random researcher 
spends with each journal may give us a rea  
sonable estimate of the amount of time that 
real researchers spend with each journal. 

as librarians work to meet increasing sub  
scription prices with increasingly constrained 
subscription budgets, powerful measures of 
journal in   uence and journal value may use  

top ten nonreview journals in the sciences

article 
in   uence 
journal 
1. science 
17.44 
2. cell 
16.95 
3. nature 
15.88 
4. nature immunology 
14.54 
5. nature genetics 
14.28 
6. new england j. medicine  13.88 
7. developmental cell
13.24 
8. quarterly j. economics
12.75 
9. nature medicine
12.69 
10. genes & development
11.06 

eigenfactor 

2.16 
0.78 
2.32 
0.19 
0.42 
0.72 
0.10 
0.07 
0.29 
0.43 

may 2007

 315 

c&rl news 

fully  supplement  expert  opinion  and  other 
sources  of  information  in  making  dif    cult 
decisions  about  journal  holdings.  our  aim 
with the eigenfactor project is to provide such 
a resource to the library community. 

notes 

1. p. l. k. gross and e. m. gross,    college 
libraries  and  chemical  education,     science 
66 (1927): 385  389. 

2.  r.  monastersky,     the  number  that   s 
devouring  science,     chronicle  of  higher 
education 52 (2005) a12. 

3. d. j. de solla price,    networks of scien  

ti    c papers,    science 149 (1965): 510  515 

4. ben althouse, martin rosvall, and jevin 
west  at  the  university  of  washington,  and 
ted bergstrom at the university of california   
santa barbara. 

5. www.eigenfactor.org/methods.pdf; see 
also previous iterative algorithms proposed by 
pinski and narin 1978;liebowitz and palmer 
1984 kalaitzidakis, et al. 2003; palacios  huerta 
2004; kodryzcky 2005; bollen 2006] 

references 

j. bollen, m. a. rodriguez and h. van de 
sompel. 2006. journal status. scientometrics 
69: 669  687. 

p.  kalaitzidakis  and  t.  stegnos  and  t. 
p.  mamuneas.  2003.  rankings  of  academic 
journals and institutions in economics. jour  
nal  of  the  european  economic  association 
1: 1346  1366. 

y. k. kodrzycki and p. d. yu. 2005. new 
approaches  to  ranking  economic  journals. 
federal  reserve  bank  of  boston  working 
paper: 5  12. 

s. j. liebowitz and j. p. palmer. 1984. assess  
ing the relative impacts of economics journals. 
journal of economic literature 22: 77  88. 

i. palacios  huerta and o. volij. 2004. the 
measurement of intellectual in    uence. econo  
metrica 72: 963  977. 

g. pinski and f. narin. 1976. citation in  
   uence  for  journal  aggregates  of  scienti    c 
publications: theory, with application to the 
literature of physics. information processing 
and management 12: 297  312. 

perry dean rogers |  partners architects 

agnes scott college library 

webster university library 

agnes scott college library

designers for libraries & academic institutions

177 milk street boston massachusetts 02109  t 617 423 0100  f 617 426 2274  w perrydean.com 

c&rl news 

may 2007

316

