the utility of text: the case of amicus briefs and the supreme court

yanchuan sim

language technologies institute

carnegie mellon university
pittsburgh, pa 15213, usa

ysim@cs.cmu.edu

bryan r. routledge
tepper school of business
carnegie mellon university
pittsburgh, pa 15213, usa
routledge@cmu.edu

noah a. smith

language technologies institute

carnegie mellon university
pittsburgh, pa 15213, usa
nasmith@cs.cmu.edu

4
1
0
2

 

v
o
n
5
2

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

5
v
5
8
9
7

.

9
0
4
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

we explore the idea that authoring a piece of text is an
act of maximizing one   s expected utility. to make this
idea concrete, we consider the societally important deci-
sions of the supreme court of the united states. exten-
sive past work in quantitative political science provides
a framework for empirically modeling the decisions of
justices and how they relate to text. we incorporate into
such a model texts authored by amici curiae (   friends of
the court    separate from the litigants) who seek to weigh
in on the decision, then explicitly model their goals in
a random utility model. we demonstrate the bene   ts of
this approach in improved vote prediction and the abil-
ity to perform counterfactual analysis.

1

introduction

some pieces of text are written with clear goals in mind.
economists and game theorists use the word utility for the
concept of satisfying a need or desire, and a huge array of
theories and models are available for analyzing how utility-
seeking agents behave. this paper takes the    rst steps in in-
corporating text into these models.

the supreme court of the united states (scotus) is the
highest court in the american judicial system; its decisions
have far-reaching effects. while the ideological tendencies
of scotus    nine justices are widely discussed by press and
public, there is a formal mechanism by which organized in-
terest groups can lobby the court on a given case. these
groups are known as amici curiae (latin for    friends of the
court,    hereafter    amici,    singular    amicus   ), and the textual
artifacts they author   known as amicus briefs   reveal ex-
plicit attempts to sway justices one way or the other. taken
alongside voting records and other textual artifacts that char-
acterize a case, amicus briefs provide a fascinating setting
for empirical study of in   uence through language.

we build on well-established methodology from political
science known as ideal points for analyzing votes. specif-
ically, lauderdale and clark (2014) combined descriptive
text and ideal points in a probabilistic topic model. although
the in   uence of amici has been studied extensively by legal
scholars (collins 2008), we are the    rst to incorporate them
into ideal points analysis (  2). drawing on decision theory,
copyright c(cid:13) 2015, association for the advancement of arti   cial
intelligence (www.aaai.org). all rights reserved.

we then posit amici as rational agents seeking to maximize
their expected utility by framing their arguments to in   uence
justices toward a favorable outcome (  3). we derive appro-
priate id136 and parameter estimation procedures (  4).
our experiments (  5) show that the new approach offers
substantial gains in vote prediction accuracy. more impor-
tantly, we show how the model can be used to answer ques-
tions such as: how effective were amici on each side of
a case? what would have happened if some or all amicus
briefs were not    led? how might an amicus have changed
her brief to obtain a better outcome? since our approach
characterizes the amicus brief as a (probabilistic) function
of the case parameters, our approach could also be used to
ask how the amici would have altered their briefs given dif-
ferent merits facts or a different panel of justices. although
we focus on scotus, our model is applicable to any set-
ting where textual evidence for competing goals is available
alongside behavioral response.

scotus terminology. scotus reviews the decisions
of lower courts and (less commonly) resolves disputes be-
tween states.1 in a typical case, the petitioner writes a
brief putting forward her legal argument; the respondent
(the other party) then    les a brief. these, together with a
round of responses to each other   s initial briefs, are collec-
tively known as merits briefs. amicus briefs   further ar-
guments and recommendations on either side   may be    led
by groups with an interest (but not a direct stake) in the
outcome, with the court   s permission. after oral arguments
(not necessarily allotted for every case) conclude, the jus-
tices vote and author one or more opinions. in this paper, we
relate the votes of justices to merits and amicus briefs.

2

ideal point models

ideal point (ip) models are a mainstay in quantitative polit-
ical science, often applied to voting records to place voters
(lawmakers, justices, etc.) in a continuous space. a justice   s
   ideal point    is a latent variable positioning her in this space.

unidimensional ideal points the simplest model for ju-
dicial votes is a unidimensional ip model (martin and quinn

1details about the procedures and rules of the scotus can be

found at http://www.uscourts.gov.

2002), which posits an ip   j     r for each justice j.2
often the   j values are interpreted as positions along a
liberal-conservative ideological spectrum. each case i is rep-
resented by popularity (ai) and polarity (bi) parameters.3 a
probabilistic view of the unidimensional ip model is that jus-
tice j votes in favor of case i   s petitioner with id203

p(vi,j = petitioner |   j, ai, bi) =    (ai +   jbi)

where   (x) = exp(x)
1+exp(x) is the logistic function. when the
popularity parameter ai is high enough, every justice is more
likely to favor the petitioner. the polarity bi captures the im-
portance of the justice   s ideology   j: more polarizing cases
(i.e., |bi| (cid:29) 0) push justice j more strongly to the side of the
petitioner (if bi has the same sign as   j) or the respondent
(otherwise). while they recover dimensions that maximize
statistical    t, ip models con   ate many substantive dimen-
sions of opinion and policy, making it dif   cult to interpret
additional dimensions.4 indeed, such embeddings are igno-
rant of the issues at stake, or any content of the case, and
they cannot generalize to new cases.

issues and ideal points lauderdale and clark (2014) in-
corporate text as evidence and infer dimensions of ip that are
grounded in    topical    space. they build on latent dirichlet
allocation (lda; see blei, ng, and jordan 2003), a popu-
lar model of latent topics or themes in text corpora. in their
model, each case i is embedded as   i in a d-dimensional
simplex; the dth dimension   i,d corresponds to the propor-
tion of case i that is about issue (or, in lda terminology,
topic) d. the id203 of justice j   s vote is given by

p(vi,j = petitioner |   j,   i, ai, bi) =   (cid:0)ai +   

j (bi  i)(cid:1)

(cid:62)

where   j,d is an issue-speci   c position for justice j. there-
fore, the relative degree that each dimension predicts the
vote outcome is determined by the text   s mixture propor-
tions, resulting in the issue-speci   c ip   (cid:62)
j   i. in their work,
they inferred the mixture proportions from justices    opin-
ions, although one can similarly use merits briefs, appeals
court opinions, or any other texts that serve as evidence for
inferring the issues of a case.

lauderdale and clark (2014) found that incorporating tex-
tual data in this manner5 addresses the labeling problem for
multidimensional models, and is especially useful for small
voting bodies (e.g., scotus), where estimating multidi-
mensional models is dif   cult due to few observations and
variation of preferences across issues.

2martin and quinn (2002) describe a dynamic unidimensional
ip model where justice ips vary over time. in this work, we assume
each justice   s ip is    xed over time, for simplicity.

3this model is also known as a two parameter logistic model in
item response theory literature (fox 2010), where ai is    dif   culty   
and bi is    discrimination.   

4a seminal    nding of poole and rosenthal (1985) is that two
dimensions, corresponding to left-right ideology and geographical
latitude, explain most of the variance in u.s. congressional votes.
5of course, lda is not the only way to    embed    a case in a
simplex. one can take advantage of expert categorization of case
issues. for example, gerrish and blei (2012) used bill labels as
supervision to infer the proportions of issues.

amici and ideal points the merits briefs describe the is-
sues and facts of the case. it is our hypothesis that amicus
briefs serve to    frame    the facts and, potentially, in   uence
the case outcome. collins (2008) argued that these organized
interest groups play a signi   cant role in shaping justices   
choices. public interest groups, such as the aclu and citi-
zens united, frequently advocate their positions on any case
that impinges on their goals. these briefs can provide valu-
able assistance to the court in its deliberation; for example,
they can present an argument not found in the merits.6

when    ling amicus briefs, amici are required to identify
the side they are supporting (or if neither). however, it is
not trivial to automatically tell which side the amici are on
as these intentions are not expressed consistently. we solve
this by training a classi   er on hand-labeled data (  4).

we propose that amici represent an attempt to shift the po-
sition of the case by emphasizing some issues more strongly
or framing the case distinctly from the perspectives given in
the merits briefs. the effective position of a case, previously
p
bi  i, is in our model bi  i +c
i are
i    
the amicus polarities for briefs on the side of the petitioner
and respondent.    
i are the mean issue proportions
of the amicus briefs on the side of the petitioner and respon-
dent, respectively. our amici-augmented ip model is:
p(vi,j = petitioner |   j,   i,    i, ai, bi, ci)

p
i and cr
i, where c

p
i and    r

p
i +cr

i   r

=   (cid:0)ai +   

(cid:62)
j

(cid:0)bi  i + c

p
i    

p
i + cr

i   r

i

(cid:1)(cid:1)

(1)

p

{p,r}
i

in this model, the vote-speci   c ip is in   uenced by two forms
of text: legal arguments put forth by the parties involved
(merits briefs, embedded in   i), and by the amici curiae (am-
), both of which are rescaled
icus briefs, embedded in    
independently by the case discrimination parameters to gen-
erate the vote id203. when either |c
i| or |cr
i| is large
(relative to ai and bi), the vote is determined by the contents
of the amicus briefs. hereafter, we let   i = (cid:104)ai, bi, c
i(cid:105).
p
i , cr
i be the average mixture proportions inferred
from text of briefs supporting side s, we implicitly assume
that briefs supporting the same side share a single parameter,
and individual briefs on one side in   uence the vote-speci   c
ip equally. while lynch (2004) and others have argued that
some amici are more effective (i.e., in   uence on justices   
votes varies across amicus authors), our model captures the
collective effect of amicus briefs and is simple.

by letting    s

3 amici as agents

in the previous section, the ip models focus on justices    po-
sitions embedded in a continuous space. however, we want
to account for the fact that amici are purposeful decision
makers who write briefs hoping to sway votes on a case.
suppose we have an amicus curiae supporting side s (e.g.,
petitioner), which is presided by a set of justices, j. the am-
icus is interested in getting votes in favor of her side, that is,
vj = s. thus, we assume that she has a simple evaluation

6on occasion, scotus may adopt a position not advanced by
either side, but instead urged solely by an amicus brief. some no-
table cases are: mapp v. ohio, 367 u.s. 643, 646 (1961) and more
recently, turner v. rogers, 131 s. ct. 2507 (2011).

function over the outcome of votes v1, . . . , v9,

u(v1, v2, . . . , v9) =(cid:80)

j   j i(vj = s),

(2)

where i is the indicator function. this is her utility.

cost of writing.
in addition to the policy objectives of an
amicus, we need to characterize her    technology    (or    bud-
get   ) set. we do this by specifying a cost function, c, that is
increasing in difference between     and the    facts    in   :

c(   ,   ) =   

2(cid:107)          (cid:107)2

2

where    > 0 is a hyperparameter controlling the cost (rela-
tive to the vote evaluation). the function captures the notion
that amicus briefs cannot be arbitrary text; there is disutility
or effort required to carefully frame a case, or the mone-
tary cost of hiring legal counsel. the key assumption here
is that framing is costly, while simply matching the merits is
easy (and presumably unnecessary). note the role of the cost
function is analogous to id173 in other contexts.

expected utility. the outcome of the case is uncertain, so
the amicus    objective will consider her expected utility:7

e   [u(v1, . . . , v9)]       

2(cid:107)          (cid:107)2

2

max

   

when an amicus writes her brief, we assume that she has
knowledge of the justices    ips, case parameters, and contents
of the merits briefs, but ignores other amici.8 as such, tak-
ing linearity of expectations, we can compute the expected
utility for an amicus on side s using eq. 1:9

j   j   (cid:0)a +   (cid:62)
(cid:80)

j (b   + cs   )(cid:1)       

2(cid:107)          (cid:107)2

2

max

   

(3)

random utility models. there are several conceivable
ways to incorporate amici   s optimization into our estima-
tion of justices    ip. we could maximize the likelihood and
impose a constraint that     solve our expected utility opti-
mization (either directly or by checking the    rst order condi-
tions).10 or, we can view such (soft) constraints as imposing
a prior on    :

2(cid:107)          (cid:107)2
2)

putil(   )     e   [u(v1, . . . )] +   (1     1
7we use an evaluation function that is linear in votes for sim-
plicity. the scale of the function is unimportant (expected utility is
invariant to af   ne transformations). however, we leave for future
work other speci   cations of the evaluation function; for example a
function that places more emphasis on the majority vote outcome.
8capturing strategic amici agents (a petitioner amicus choosing
brief topics considering a respondent amicus    brief) would require
a complicated game theoretical model and, we conjecture, would
require a much richer representation of policy and goals.

9the    rst-order conditions for amicus    purposeful maximiza-
tion with respect to     lead to interesting brief writing trade offs,
which can be found in supplementary   a.

10this is reminiscent of learning frameworks where constraints
are placed on the posterior distributions (chang, ratinov, and roth
2007; ganchev et al. 2010; mccallum, mann, and druck 2007).
however, the nonlinear nature of our expectations makes it dif   cult
to optimize and characterize the constrained distribution.

figure 1: plate diagrams for the ip models (left) and random
utility model (right). j, c and ai are the sets of justices,
cases, and amicus briefs (for case i), respectively.   j is the
p
i and
ip for justice j;   i is the set of case parameters ai, bi, c
cr
i for case i; and   ,   ,   , and    are hyperparameters. the
mixture proportion nodes (dashed) are    xed in our estima-
tion procedure. on the left, black nodes comprise the basic
ip model, blue nodes are found in both the issues ip and
amici ip models, while magenta nodes are found only in the
amici ip model.
where the constant is added so that putil is non-negative.
note, were the utility negative, the amici would have chosen
not to write a the brief. this approach is known as a random
utility model in the econometrics discrete-choice literature
(mcfadden 1974). random utility models relax the preci-
sion of the optimization by assuming that agent preferences
also contain an idiosyncratic random component. hence, the
behavior we observe (i.e., the amicus    topic mixture propor-
tions) has a likelihood that is proportional to expected utility.
considering all the amici, we estimate the full likelihood

l(w, v,   ,   ,    ,   )   (cid:2)(cid:81)

(4)
where l(  ) is the likelihood of our amici ip model (eq. 1),
and    is a hyperparameter that controls in   uence of utility
on parameter estimation.

eq. 4 resembles product of experts model (hinton 2002).
for the likelihood of votes in a case to be maximized, it is
necessary that no individual component   generative story
for votes, amicus briefs   assigns a low id203. accord-
ingly, this results in a principled manner for us to incorpo-
rate our assumptions about amici as rational decision mak-
ers, each of whom is an    expert    with the goal of nudging
latent variables to maximize her own expected utility.

k   a putil(   k)(cid:3)  

4 learning and id136

model priors. the models we described above combine
ideal points, topic models, and random utility; they can be
estimated within a bayesian framework. following laud-
erdale and clark (2014), we place gaussian priors on the jus-
tice and case parameters:        u(0, 1),   j     n(0,   i +   1)
for each justice j, and   i     n(0,   ) for each case i. the
positive off-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix for
justice ips orient the issue-speci   c dimensions in the same
direction (i.e., with conservatives at the same end) and pro-
vide shrinkage of ip in each dimension to their common
mean across dimensions. fig. 1 presents the plate diagram
for the ip models (  2) on the left and the random utility
model (  3) on the right.

vi,j  j    u(0,1)  i    i     ksk  aijcvi,j  j    u(0,1)  i    i     kskaijcfor the non-utility ip models involving text (  2), lda is
used to infer the latent topic mixtures of text associated with
the case and amicus briefs, thus   i and    k are both drawn
from a symmetric dirichlet distribution with hyperparame-
ter    and tokens in both sets of texts are drawn from shared
topic-word distributions.11

our random utility model can be described through a sim-
ilar generative story. instead of drawing amicus briefs (   )
from a dirichlet, they are drawn from the expected util-
ity distribution (eq. 3). the right side of fig. 1 shows the
corresponding plate diagram. importantly, note that     here
serves as direct evidence for the justice and case parameters,
rather than in   uencing them through v-structures.

parameter estimation. we decoupled the estimation of
the topic mixture parameters as a stage separate from the
ip parameters. this approach follows lauderdale and clark
(2014), who argued for its conceptual simplicity: the text
data de   ne the rotation of a multidimensional preference
space, while the second stage estimates the locations in that
space. we found in preliminary experiments that similar is-
sue dimensions result from joint vs. stage-wise id136,
but that the latter is much more computationally ef   cient.

using lda,12    (and, where relevant,    ) are estimated,
then    xed to their posterior means while solving for jus-
tice parameters    and case parameters   . for the second
stage, we used metropolis within gibbs (tierney 1994), a
hybrid mcmc algorithm, to sample the latent parameters
from their posterior distributions. we sampled   i for each
case and   j for each justice blockwise from a multivariate
gaussian proposal distribution, tuning the diagonal covari-
ance matrix to a target acceptance rate of 15   45%. likewise,
   is sampled from a univariate gaussian proposal, with its
variance tuned similarly. for our random utility model, we
used the same mcmc approach in sampling the latent irt
variables, but include the expected utility term for each brief
in the likelihood function (eq. 4). details of our sampler and
hyperparameter settings can be found in the supplementary
materials (  b), while topics and justices    ips estimated by
our model are found in   d and   e, respectively.

data. we focused on 23 terms of the court from 1990   
2012 (spaeth et al. 2013),13 using texts from lexisnexis.14
we concatenate each of the 2,074 cases    merits briefs from
both parties to form a single document, where the text is
used to infer the representation of the case in topical space
(  ; i.e., merits briefs are treated as    facts of the case   ). we
did not make use of case opinions as did lauderdale and
clark (2014) because opinions are written after votes are

11we omit details of lda, as it is widely known.
12we used the c++ implementation of lda by liu et al. (2011).
13the unit of analysis is the case citation, and we select cases
where the type of decision equals 1 (orally argued cases with signed
opinions), 5 (cases with equally divided vote), 6 (orally argued
per curiam cases), or 7 (judgements of the court). in addition, we
dropped cases where the winning side was not clear (i.e., coded as
   favorable disposition for petitioning party unclear   ).

14http://www.lexisnexis.com

model
id28 w/ topics
unanimous
unidimensional ip
issues ip
amici ip
random utility ip

accuracy
0.715    0.008
0.714    0.003
0.583    0.037
0.671    0.008
0.690    0.021
0.742    0.006

table 1: average pairwise vote partition accuracy (   ve-fold
cross-validation).

cast, tainting the data for predictive modeling. each amicus
brief is treated as a single document.

as the amicus briefs in our dataset were not explicitly la-
beled with the side that they support, and manually labeling
each brief would be a tedious endeavor, we built a classi   er
to automatically label the briefs with the side the amici are
supporting, taking advantage of cues in the brief content that
strongly signal the side that the amici is supporting (e.g.,    in
support of petitioner    and    af   rm the judgement   ).

additionally, we    nd that using only phrases (instead of
standard bag-of-words) gave us more interpretable topics
(sim et al. 2013). details of our phrase extraction, data pre-
processing steps, and brief    side    classi   cation are in the
supplementary materials (  c).

5 experiments and analysis

5.1 vote prediction
we evaluate each model   s ability to predict how justices
would vote on a case out of the training sample. to com-
pute the id203 of justices    votes, we    rst infer the topic
mixture proportions for the case   s merits briefs (  ), and am-
icus briefs (   ). given all the justice   s ips   j, we    nd the
most likely vote outcome for the case by integrating over
the case parameters   :

(cid:82)
  p(   |   )(cid:81)
  (cid:81)

j   j p(vj |   j,   ,    ,   )
k   a putil(   k |   ,   ,    ,   , sk)

arg max

v

where sk is the side brief k supports, and the multiplier is
the expected utility term (eq. 3) which is ignored for the
non-utility based models.

due to the speci   cation of ip models, the id203 of
a vote is a logistic function of the vote-speci   c ip, which
is a symmetric function implying that justice j   s id203
of voting towards the petitioner will be the same as if she
voted for the respondent when we negate the vote-speci   c
ip. thus, we would not be able to distinguish the actual side
that the justice will favor, but we can identify the most likely
partitioning of the justices into two groups.15 we can then
evaluate, for each case, an average pairwise accuracy score,

j,j(cid:48)   j:j(cid:54)=j(cid:48) i[i[  vj =   vj(cid:48)] = i[v   

j = v   
j(cid:48)]]

where   v (v   ) are predicted (actual) votes.

we performed 5-fold cross validation, and present the
vote partition accuracy in table 1. we have two na    ve base-
lines, (i) where all justices vote unanimously, and (ii) where

(cid:0)9
(cid:1)   1(cid:80)

2

15given the partitioning of justices, domain experts should be

able to identify the side each group of justices would favor.

we trained an (cid:96)1-regularized id28 classi   er for
each justice using the concatenated topic proportions of   
and     as features for each case. the baselines exhibit sim-
ilar accuracies, and perform better than when adjusting for
issues and/or amici. this suggests that justices    votes do not
always align with their ips, and that topic models alone may
be inadequate for representing ips. furthermore, we believe
there may be insuf   cient information to learn the amicus po-
larity case parameters (cs) in the amici ip model (which is
slightly better than the issues ip model). however, in the ran-
dom utility model, amici-agents-experts weigh in, providing
additional signals for estimating these parameters, achiev-
ing signi   cantly (paired samples t-test, p < 0.001) better
predictive accuracy than the baseline.

as an additional qualitative validation of our approach,
we compared the log-likelihoods between models that con-
sider vs. ignore amicus briefs. we found correlations with
anecdotal evidence of how justices view the in   uence of am-
icus briefs (see   f for details).
5.2 post hoc analysis of votes
on a case level, we can tease apart the relative contribution
each textual component to a justice   s decision by analyzing
the case parameters learnt by our random utility model. by
zeroing out various case parameters, and plotting them, we
can visualize the different impact that each type of text has
on a justice   s vote-speci   c ip. for example, fig. 2 shows the
vote-speci   c ip estimates of justices for the 2011 term death
penalty case maples v. thomas (132 s. ct. 912). the issues-

figure 2: vote-speci   c ip estimates decomposed into differ-
ent in   uences on each justice   s vote on maples v. thomas.
an ip towards the left (right) indicates higher log-odds of
vote that is favorable to maples (thomas).

only ips are computed by zeroing out both the amicus polar-
ity parameters (cp and cr). on the other hand, the ip due to
amicus briefs supporting maples (thomas) is computed by
zeroing out only cr (cp). we observe that the issues-only ips
are aligned with each justice   s (widely known) ideological
stance on the issue of capital punishment. for instance, the
issues-only ips of thomas, scalia, alito, and roberts, the
strong conservative bloc, favor the respondents (that maples
should not be awarded relief); so did kennedy, who is widely
recognized as the swing justice. when effects of all amicus
briefs are taken into account, the justices    ips shift toward
maples with varying magnitudes, with the result re   ecting
the actual ruling (7   2 with thomas and scalia dissenting).

5.3 counterfactual analysis
following pearl (2000), we can query the model and per-
form counterfactual analyses using the vote prediction algo-
rithm (  5.1). as an illustration, we consider national fed-
eration of independent business (nfib) v. sebelius (hhs)
(132 s. ct. 2566), a landmark 2011 case in which the court
upheld congress   s power to enact most provisions of the af-
fordable care act (aca;    obamacare   ).16

in the merits briefs, the topics discussed revolve around
interstate commerce and the individual mandate, while there
is an interesting disparity in topics between briefs support-
ing nfib and hhs.17 notably, amici supporting nfib are
found, on average, to use language concerning individual
mandate, while amici supporting hhs tend to focus more
on topics related to interstate commerce. this is commensu-
rate with the main arguments put forth by the litigants, where
nfib was concerned about the overreach of the government
in imposing an individual mandate, while hhs argued that
healthcare regulation by congress falls under the commerce
clause. our model was most uncertain about roberts and
kennedy, and wrong about both (fig. 3 top).

choosing sides. the    rst type of counterfactual analysis
that we introduce is,    what if no (or only one side   s) amicus
briefs were submitted in the aca case?    to answer it, we
hold the case out of the training set and attempt to predict the
votes under the hypothetical circumstances with the random
utility model. fig. 3 (top) shows the resulting ip of hypothet-
ical situations where no amicus briefs were    led, or when
only briefs supporting one side are    led. if no amici    led
briefs, the model expects that all but kagan and sotomayor
would favor nfib, but with uncertainty. with the inclusion
of the amicus briefs supporting nfib, the model becomes
more con   dent that the conservative bloc of the court would
vote in favor of nfib (except for alito). interestingly, the
model anticipates that the same briefs will turn the liberals
away. in contrast, the briefs on hhs    side have more suc-
cess in swaying the case in their favor, especially the crucial
swing vote of kennedy (although it turned out that kennedy
sided with the conservative bloc, and roberts emerged as the
deciding vote in hhs favor). consequently, the model can
provide insights about judicial decisions, while postulating
different hypothetical situations.

choosing what to write. another counterfactual analysis
we can perform, more useful from the viewpoint of the am-
icus, is,    how should an amicus frame arguments to best
achieve her goals?    in the context of our model, such an
amicus would like to choose the topic mixture     to maxi-
mize her expected utility (eq. 3). ideally, one would com-

16the case attracted much attention, including a record 136 am-
icus briefs, of which 76 of these briefs are used in our dataset. 58
(of the 76) were automatically classi   ed as supporting nfib.

17the merits briefs were estimated at 41% and 20% on the in-
terstate commerce and the individual mandate topics, respectively.
nfib amicus briefs were 15% on interstate commerce and 41% on
individual mandate; these    gures switch to 36% and 22% for hhs
amicus briefs.

   15   10   50510maplesv.thomasginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganrobertsalitokennedyscaliathomasissuesipamici(maples)amici(thomas)amici+issueipnot fully capture the agenda of each individual amicus; (v)
each amicus brief is treated independently (i.e., no sharing
across briefs with the same author), as we do not have ac-
cess to clean author metadata. despite these simpli   cations,
the model is a useful tool for quantitative analysis and hy-
pothesis generation in support of substantive research on the
judiciary.

6 related work

poole and rosenthal (1985) introduced the ip model, us-
ing roll call data to infer latent positions of lawmakers.
since then, many varieties of ip models have been pro-
posed for different voting scenarios: ip models for sco-
tus (martin and quinn 2002), multidimensional ip mod-
els for congressional voting (heckman and snyder 1996;
clinton, jackman, and rivers 2004), grounding multidimen-
sional ip models using topics learned from text of congres-
sional bills (gerrish and blei 2012) and scotus opinions
(lauderdale and clark 2014).

amici have been studied extensively, especially their in-
   uence on scotus (caldeira and wright 1988; kearney
and merrill 2000; collins 2008; corley, collins, and ham-
ner 2013). collins (2007) found that justices can be in   u-
enced by persuasive argumentation presented by organized
interests. these studies focus on ideology metadata (lib-
eral/conservative slant of amici, justices, decisions, etc.),
disregarding the rich signals encoded in the text of these
briefs, whereas we use text as evidence of utility maximizing
behavior to study the in   uence of amicus curiae.

our model is also related to gentzkow and shapiro (2010)
who model the purposeful    slant    of pro   t-maximizing
newspapers looking to gain circulation from consumers with
a preference for such slant. more generally, extensive litera-
ture in econometrics estimates structural utility-based deci-
sions (berry, levinsohn, and pakes 1995, inter alia).

in addition to work on ip models, researchers have used
court opinions for authorship (li et al. 2013) and historical
analysis, while oral argument transcripts have been used to
study power relationships (danescu-niculescu-mizil et al.
2012; prabhakaran, john, and seligmann 2013) and prag-
matics (goldwasser and daum  e iii 2014).

7 conclusion

we have introduced a random utility model for persuasive
text; it is similar to a classical generative model and can be
estimated using familiar algorithms. the key distinction is
that persuasive text is modeled as a function of the addressee
and the particulars of the matter about which she is being
convinced; authors are agents seeking to maximize their ex-
pected utility in a given scenario. in the domain of sco-
tus, this leads to improved vote prediction performance, as
the model captures the structure of amicus briefs better than
simpler treatments of the text. secondly, and more impor-
tantly, our model is able to address interesting counterfactual
questions. were some amicus briefs not    led, or had they
been written differently, or had the facts of the case been
presented differently, or had different justices presided, our
approach can estimate the resulting outcomes.

figure 3: counterfactual analyses for nfib v. sebelius
(hhs). top: what if amicus briefs for one side were not
   led? bottom: what if a single amicus    les an    optimally   
written brief? an ip towards the left (right) indicates higher
log-odds of vote favorable to nfib (hhs). hollow markers
denote that prediction differed from the actual outcome.

pute such a topic mixture by maximizing over both     and
vote outcome v, while integrating over the case parameters.
we resort to a cheaper approximation: analyzing the    ler   s
expected utility curve over two particular topic dimensions:
the individual mandate and interstate commerce topics. that
is, we compute the expected utility curve (see supplementary
  g) faced by a single amicus as we vary the topic propor-
tions of individual mandate and interstate commerce topics
over multiples of 0.1.

consequently, the amicus who supports nfib can expect
to maximize their expected utility (5.2 votes at a cost of
0.21) by    spending    about 70% of their text on individual
mandate. on the other hand, the best that an amicus sup-
porting hhs can do is to write a brief that is 80% about
interstate commerce, and garner 4.7 votes at a cost of 0.31.
we plot the justices    predicted ips in fig. 3 (bottom) using
these    best    proportions. the    best    proportions ips are dif-
ferent (sometimes worse) from that in fig. 3 (top) because
in the latter, there are multiple amici in   uencing the case pa-
rameters (through their utility functions) and other topics are
present which will sway the justices. from the perspective
of an amicus supporting hhs, the two closest swing votes
in the case are roberts and kennedy; we know a posteriori
that roberts sided with hhs.
5.4 discussion
our model makes several simplifying assumptions: (i) it ig-
nores the effects of other amici on a single amicus    writ-
ing; (ii) amici are treated modularly, with a multiplicative
effect and no consideration of diminishing returns, tempo-
ral ordering, or reputation; (iii) the cost function does not
capture the intricacies of legal writing style (i.e., choice of
citations, artful language, etc.); (iv) the utility function does

   2.0   1.5   1.0   0.50.00.51.01.5ginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganrobertsalitokennedyscaliathomasbothamicinoamicusnfibamicihhsamici   0.8   0.6   0.4   0.20.00.20.40.60.8ginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganrobertsalitokennedyscaliathomasnoamicusnfibamicushhsamicusacknowledgements

this research was supported in part by an a*star fellow-
ship to y. sim, nsf grant iis-1211277, a google research
award, and by computing resources from the pittsburgh su-
percomputing center.

appendices

a brief writing trade offs

consider the    rst-order (or kkt) condition for the purpose-
ful amicus    maximization w.r.t. the dth issue:18

j   j   (cid:48)  j,dcs       (   d       d)

j   j   (cid:48)  j,1cs       (   1       1)

if 0 <    d < 1

(cid:80)
=(cid:80)

where   (cid:48) is the    rst order derivative of the vote probabil-
ity sigmoid function. optimality drives all topics (with pos-
itive weight) to have equal marginal values.19 the marginal
value highlights the tradeoffs an amicus faces, in four com-
ponents: (i) the cost of deviating from the merits, i.e., a large
difference between    d and   d, is   ; (ii) a justice whose   (cid:48)
is large, i.e., whose vote is uncertain, receives greater atten-
tion, in particular (iii) on issues she cares about, i.e.,   j,d is
large, with (iv) cs controlling the strength of correspondence
to issues justices care about.

b likelihood of random utility ideal point

model

the likelihood of our amici model with random utility is
given below,

p(v,   ,   , a, b, cp, r |   ,   ,    , s)
p, r
p(ai, bi, c
i

p(  j |   ,   )

|   )

(cid:89)

   (cid:89)
  (cid:89)

j   j

(cid:89)

(cid:89)

i   c
e[ui,k]  

vi,j

i   c

j   j

k   ai

where

  (x) = exp(x)

p, r
i )

vi,j = p(vi,j |   j,   i,    i, ai, bi, c

=    [(1     vi,j)ai
+(1     vi,j)  
(cid:62)
j (bi  i + c
(cid:88)
(cid:18)

  (cid:0)ai +   

1+exp(x) is the logistic function, and
e[ui,k] =

(cid:62)
j (bi  i + csi,k

(cid:19)

j   j

i   r

i)(cid:3) ,
i    i,k)(cid:1)

p
p
i + cr
i    

+   

1     1
2

(cid:107)   i,k       i(cid:107)2

2

18we consider inner points for clarity; if    d = 1, equality is

replaced with     (respectively, 0 and    ).
d-topic model, the amicus has only d     1 choices.

19comparing each topic   s proportion to topic 1 is arbitrary. in a

we add a constant to the expected utility term so that it
will always be     0. during each iteration of gibbs sam-
p, r
pling, we sampled each latent variable   ,   j and [ai, bi, c
]
i
blockwise from the likelihood in turn using the metropolis-
hastings algorithm. in each metropolis-hastings random
walk, we took 500 steps, ignoring the    rst 250 for burn-in
and keeping every 10th step to compute the mean, which we
use as our gibbs update. in total, we performed 2,000 gibbs
iterations over the training data.

hyperparameters. we    xed the number of topics in our
model to 30. for lda, the symmetric dirichlet parame-
ter for document-topic and topic-word distributions are 0.1
and 0.001, respectively. for priors on the ip latent variables,
we follow the same settings used by lauderdale and clark
(2014), setting priors on case parameters,   , to 4.0, and jus-
tice ips component-wise variance,    to 1.0. in the random
utility model, we set both hyperparameters    and    to 1.

c data

we tokenized all the texts and tagged the tokens with the
stanford part of speech tagger (toutanova et al. 2003).
we extract id165s with tags that follow the simple (but
effective) pattern (adjective|cardinal|noun)+ noun
(justeson and katz 1995), representing each document as a
   bag of phrases   , and    ltering phrases that appear in less
than 25 or more than 3,000 documents obtaining a vocabu-
lary of 55,113 phrase types. table 2 summarizes details of
our corpus.

cases
w/amicus briefs
max. briefs/case
word tokens
phrase tokens
ave. words/brief
ave. phrases/brief

2,074
1,531
76
110.5m
8.9m
3,094
339

table 2: corpus statistics ignoring amicus briefs whose
supporting side could not be automatically classi   ed con-
   dently. in the last row, briefs include merits and amicus
briefs.

we manually labeled 1,241 randomly selected ami-
cus briefs with its side (petitioner, respondent, neither),
and trained a id28 classi   er20 using lex-
ical and formatting features. we identi   ed 5 sections
which are common across almost all briefs and used
them as features. the feature templates for our clas-
si   er are: (cid:104)w(cid:105),(cid:104)title,w(cid:105), (cid:104)counsel,w(cid:105), (cid:104)introduction,w(cid:105),
(cid:104)statement,w(cid:105), (cid:104)conclusion,w(cid:105), where w can be any uni-
gram, bigram, or trigram.

we evaluated the performance of our classi   er using 5
random splits, with 50% of our data for training, 30% for
testing, and 20% for the development set. we tuned the
(cid:96)1-id173 weights on our dev set over the range of

20we used a c++ implementation of id28 classi   er

available at https://github.com/redpony/creg.

coef   cients {0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16}. the average accuracy of
our classi   er is 79.1%. limiting our evaluation to instances
whose posterior id203 after classi   cation is greater
than 0.8, we obtain 90.0% accuracy and recall of 52.1%.
thus, we used 7,258 (out of 13,162) briefs that were classi-
   ed as supporting neither side or whose posterior id203
is     0.8 (higher precision at the expense of recall).

d topic distribution

table 3 lists the topics and top phrases estimated from our
dataset using lda.

e justices    ideal points

the ideal points of justices vary depending on the issues. we
present the justices    ideal points for each of the 30 topics in
fig. 4.

f amici in   uence on justices

various justices have expressed opinions on the value of
amicus briefs. some justices, such as scalia, are known to
be dubious of amicus briefs, preferring to leave the task of
reading these briefs to their law clerks, who will pick out
any notable briefs for them.21 in contrast, recent surveys of
amicus citation rates in justice opinions have often ranked
sotomayor and ginsburg among justices who most often
cite amici in their opinions (franze and anderson 2011;
walsh 2013).

for each justice, we compute the difference in vote log-
likelihood between the issues ip and random utility ip mod-
els, as a (noisy) measure of amici in   uence. a larger dif-
ference in suggests that more of a justice   s decision-making
can be explained by the presence of amicus briefs. table 4
presents these differences, and the rankings are consistent
with extant hypotheses noted above. we take this consis-
tency as encouraging, in the spirit of the    preregistered    hy-
potheses of sim et al. (2013), but caution that it does not
imply a conclusion about causation.

g expected utility curve for hypothetical

amicus in obamacare case

figure 5: expected utility when varying between propor-
tions of individual mandate and interstate commerce topics.

21see roper v. simmons, 543 u.s. 551, 617-18 (2005) (scalia
j., dissenting); also,    dont re-plow the ground that you expect the
parties to plow unless you expect the parties to plow with a partic-
ularly dull plow    (attributed to scalia on the california appellate
law blog, http://bit.ly/1womlre).

justice
john paul stevens
clarence thomas   
thurgood marshall
elena kagan   
sonia sotomayor   
john roberts   
ruth bader ginsburg   
william rehnquist
stephen breyer   
david souter
samuel alito   
harry blackmun
byron white
antonin scalia   
anthony kennedy   
sandra day o   connor

diff. (  .01)

31.5
30.8
29.4
28.9
24.7
24.0
23.9
23.8
22.2
22.0
21.8
18.0
16.9
16.6
15.3
14.7

table 4: justices ordered by how much amicus briefs can
explain their votes, estimated as quadratic mean difference
in vote log-likelihood between the issues ip model and the
random utility ip model.     denotes current sitting justices.
fig. 5 illustrates the expected utility curve faced by a sin-
gle amicus as we vary the topic proportions of the individ-
ual mandate and interstate commerce topics. the model ex-
pects an amicus on nfib   s side to get more votes and hence,
higher utility, as the model expects justices to be in favor of
nfib prior to amici in   uence.
we note that interior solutions for the expected utility op-
timization only exist when proportions are     (0, 1). during
our experiment, we set the proportions of inactive topics to
10   8 instead of 0.

references

berry, s.; levinsohn, j.; and pakes, a. 1995. automobile prices
in market equilibrium. econometrica: journal of the economet-
ric society 841   890.
blei, d. m.; ng, a. y.; and jordan, m. i. 2003. latent dirichlet
allocation. journal of machine learning research 3:993   1022.
caldeira, g. a., and wright, j. r. 1988. organized interests and
agenda setting in the u.s. supreme court. american political
science review 82:1109   1127.
chang, m.-w.; ratinov, l.; and roth, d. 2007. guiding semi-
supervision with constraint-driven learning. in proceedings of
the 45th annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, 280   287.
clinton, j.; jackman, s.; and rivers, d. 2004. the statistical
analysis of roll call data. american political science review
98:355   370.
collins, p. m. 2007. lobbyists before the u.s. supreme court:
investigating the in   uence of amicus curiae briefs. political
research quarterly 60(1):55   70.
collins, p. m. 2008. friends of the supreme court: inter-
est groups and judicial decision making. oxford university
press.
corley, p.; collins, p. m.; and hamner, j. 2013. the in   uence
of amicus curiae briefs on u.s. supreme court opinion content.
in apsa 2013 annual meeting paper.
danescu-niculescu-mizil, c.; lee, l.; pang, b.; and kleinberg,
j. 2012. echoes of power: language effects and power differ-

0.0/1.00.2/0.80.4/0.60.6/0.40.8/0.21.0/0.0proportionsofindividualmandate/interstatecommerce0.520.540.560.580.60expectedutilitysupportnfibsupporthhs#
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

topic
criminal procedure
(1)
employment

due process

indians

economic activity

bankruptcy law

voting rights

first amendment

taxation

10 amicus briefs

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

labor management

civil action

civil rights

state sovereign

federal administra-
tions
interstate relations

court of appeals

fourth amendment

eighth amendment

international law

protection

equal
clause
commerce
(2)
immigration law

clause

24 death penalty

25

26

27

environmental
issues
establishment
clause
patent law

28 antitrust law

29

30

election law

criminal procedure
(2)

top phrases
reasonable doubt, supervised release, grand jury, prior conviction, plea agreement, controlled substance,
guilty plea, double jeopardy clause, sixth amendment, jury trial
erisa plan, plan administrator, employee bene   t plan, insurance company, pension plan, health care, plan
participant, individual mandate,    duciary duty, health insurance
due process clause, equal protection clause, fundamental right, domestic violence, equal protection, state
interest, d e, assisted suicide, controlled substance, rational basis
m r, m s, indian tribe, tribal court, indian country,    fth amendment, miranda warning, indian affair, vice
president, tribal member
attorney fee, limitation period, hobbs act, security law, rule 10b, actual damage, racketeering activity,    du-
ciary duty, loss causation, security exchange act
bankruptcy court, bankruptcy code, 1996 act, state commission, telecommunication service, network ele-
ment, eighth circuit, new entrant, pole attachment, communication act
voting right, minority voter, j app, voting right act, covered jurisdiction,    fteenth amendment, redistricting
plan, political process, political subdivision, minority group
   rst amendment right, commercial speech, strict scrutiny, cable operator, free speech,    rst amendment pro-
tection, protected speech, child pornography, government interest, public forum
interstate commerce, commerce clause, state tax, tax court, gross income, internal revenue code, income tax,
dormant commerce clause, state taxation, sale tax
national association, amicus brief, vast majority, brief amicus curia, large number, wide range, recent year,
public policy, wide variety, washington dc
north carolina, collective bargaining agreement, confrontation clause, sta t, north platte river, collective bar-
gaining, inland lake, laramie river, labor organization, re v
class action, class member, injunctive relief,    nal judgment, federal claim, civil action, preliminary injunc-
tion, class certi   cation, civil procedure, subject matter jurisdiction
title vii, title vi, civil right act, age discrimination, sexual harassment, old worker, major life activity, reason-
able accommodation, prima facie case, disparate impact
sovereign immunity, eleventh amendment, state of   cial, absolute immunity, false claim, private party, 42 usc
1983, state sovereign immunity, eleventh amendment immunity, federal employee
federal agency, statutory construction, plain meaning, other provision, statutory text, dc circuit, sub (a),    scal
year, senate report, agency action
special master, new mexico, prejudgment interest, arkansas river, rt vol, comp act, new jersey, elli island,
john martin reservoir, video game
eleventh circuit, sixth circuit, circuit court, fourth circuit, oral argument, tenth circuit, further proceeding,
appeal decision, instant case, defendant motion
fourth amendment, probable cause, arbitration agreement, police of   cer, national bank, search warrant, ex-
clusionary rule, arbitration clause, reasonable suspicion, law enforcement of   cer
eighth amendment, sex offender, prison of   cial, facto clause, copyright act, copyright owner, unusual pun-
ishment, public domain, liberty interest, public safety
international law, foreign state, vienna convention, human right, foreign country, foreign government, jones
act, united kingdom, native hawaiian, foreign nation
peremptory challenge, law school, equal protection clause, strict scrutiny, high education, racial discrimina-
tion, prima facie case, school district, consent decree, compelling interest
interstate commerce, commerce clause, local government, political subdivision, state regulation, supremacy
clause, federal regulation, tobacco product, tenth amendment, federal fund
judicial review, immigration law,    nal order, removal proceeding, immigration judge, due process clause,
deportation proceeding, administrative remedy, compliance order, time limit
death penalty, habeas corpus, reasonable doubt, trial judge, death sentence, ineffective assistance, direct
appeal, defense counsel, new rule, mitigating evidence
navigable water, clean water act, colorado river, special master, project act, public land,    ll material, water
right, point source, lake mead
establishment clause, school district, public school, private school, religious school, ten commandment, boy
scout, religious belief, religious organization, free exercise clause
federal circuit, patent law, prior art, subject matter, expert testimony, lanham act, hazardous substance, patent
system, patent act, new drug
antitrust law, sherman act, contr act, market power, postal service, joint venture, natural gas, high price,
public utility, interstate commerce
political party, taking clause, private property, property owner,    fth amendment, independent expenditure,
federal election, property right, contribution limit, general election
punitive damage, habeas corpus, second amendment, punitive damage award, enemy combatant, military
commission, compensatory damage, state farm, new trial, due process clause

table 3: topics and top-10 phrases estimated from briefs using lda. we manually annotated each topic with the topic labels.

.
s
e
c
i
t
s
u
j

e
h
t

f
o

t
n
i
o
p
l
a
e
d
i

n
a
i
d
e
m

s
e
t
o
n
e
d

e
n
i
l

l
a
c
i
t
r
e
v

d
i
l
o
s

.
s
c
i
p
o
t

y
b

s
t
n
i
o
p

l
a
e
d
i

   
s
e
c
i
t
s
u
j

:
4

e
r
u
g
i

f

   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas1:reasonabledoubt,supervisedrelease,grandjury   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas2:erisaplan,planadministrator,employeebene   tplan   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas3:equalprotectionclause,dueprocessclause,fundamentalright   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas4:mr,ms,indiantribe   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas5:attorneyfee,limitationperiod,hobbsact   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas6:bankruptcycourt,bankruptcycode,1996act   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas7:votingright,minorityvoter,japp   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas8:   rstamendmentright,commercialspeech,strictscrutiny   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas9:interstatecommerce,commerceclause,statetax   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas10:nationalassociation,amicusbrief,vastmajority   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas11:northcarolina,collectivebargainingagreement,confrontationclause   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas12:classaction,classmember,injunctiverelief   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas13:titlevii,titlevi,civilrightact   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas14:sovereignimmunity,eleventhamendment,stateof   cial   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas15:federalagency,statutoryconstruction,plainmeaning   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas16:specialmaster,newmexico,prejudgmentinterest   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas17:eleventhcircuit,sixthcircuit,circuitcourt   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas18:fourthamendment,probablecause,arbitrationagreement   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas19:eighthamendment,sexoffender,prisonof   cial   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas20:internationallaw,foreignstate,viennaconvention   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas21:peremptorychallenge,lawschool,equalprotectionclause   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas22:interstatecommerce,commerceclause,localgovernment   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas23:judicialreview,immigrationlaw,   nalorder   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas24:deathpenalty,habeascorpus,reasonabledoubt   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas25:navigablewater,cleanwateract,coloradoriver   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas26:establishmentclause,schooldistrict,publicschool   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas27:federalcircuit,patentlaw,priorart   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas28:antitrustlaw,shermanact,contract   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas29:politicalparty,takingclause,propertyowner   202468marshallstevensblackmunginsburgbreyersotomayorkaganwhitesouterrobertso   connoralitokennedyrehnquistscaliathomas30:punitivedamage,habeascorpus,secondamendmentmcfadden, d. 1974. conditional logit analysis of qualitative
choice behavior. in zarembka, p., ed., frontiers in economet-
rics. new york: academic press. 105   142.
pearl, j. 2000. causality: models, reasoning, and id136.
cambridge university press.
poole, k. t., and rosenthal, h. 1985. a spatial model for leg-
islative roll call analysis. american journal of political science
29(2):357   384.
prabhakaran, v.; john, a.; and seligmann, d. d. 2013. who
had the upper hand? ranking participants of interactions based
on their relative power. in proceedings of the 6th international
joint conference on natural language processing, 365   373.
sim, y.; acree, b. d. l.; gross, j. h.; and smith, n. a. 2013.
measuring ideological proportions in political speeches. in pro-
ceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing, 91   101.
spaeth, h. j.; benesh, s.; epstein, l.; martin, a. d.;
supreme
segal,
court database, version 2013 release 01.
database at
http://supremecourtdatabase.org.
tierney, l. 1994. markov chains for exploring posterior distri-
butions. the annals of statistics 22(4):1701   1728.
toutanova, k.; klein, d.; manning, c. d.; and singer, y. 2003.
feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a cyclic dependency
network. in proceedings of naacl-hlt, 173   180.
walsh, m.
supreme court report: it was an-
other big term for amicus curiae briefs at the high court.
http://www.abajournal.com/magazine/arti
cle/it was another big term for amicus cur
iae briefs at the high court.
2014.

j. a.; and ruger, t.

accessed: 08-25-

2013.

2013.

j.

ences in social interaction. in proceedings of the 21st interna-
tional conference on world wide web, www    12, 699   708.
fox, j.-p. 2010. bayesian item response modeling: theory
and applications. statistics for social and behavioral sciences.
springer.
franze, a. j., and anderson, r. r.
2011. commentary:
the court   s increasing reliance on amicus curiae in the past
term. http://www.arnoldporter.com/resources/
documents/arnold&porterllp nationallaw
journal 8.24.11.pdf. accessed: 08-25-2014.
ganchev, k.; grac  a, j. a.; gillenwater, j.; and taskar, b. 2010.
posterior id173 for structured latent variable models.
journal of machine learning research 11:2001   2049.
gentzkow, m., and shapiro, j. m. 2010. what drives me-
dia slant? evidence from u.s. daily newspapers. econometrica
78(1):35   71.
gerrish, s., and blei, d. m. 2012. how they vote: issue-
adjusted models of legislative behavior. in pereira, f.; burges,
c.; bottou, l.; and weinberger, k., eds., advances in neural
information processing systems 25, 2753   2761. curran asso-
ciates, inc.
goldwasser, d., and daum  e iii, h. 2014.    i object!    modeling
latent pragmatic effects in courtroom dialogues. in proceedings
of the 14th conference of the european chapter of the associ-
ation for computational linguistics, 655   663.
heckman, j. j., and snyder, jr., j. m. 1996. linear id203
models of the demand for attributes with an empirical applica-
tion to estimating the preferences of legislators. working paper
5785, national bureau of economic research.
hinton, g. e. 2002. training products of experts by minimizing
contrastive divergence. neural computation 14(8):1771   1800.
justeson, j. s., and katz, s. m. 1995. technical terminology:
some linguistic properties and an algorithm for identi   cation in
text. natural language engineering 1:9   27.
kearney, j. d., and merrill, t. w. 2000. the in   uence of amicus
curiae briefs on the supreme court. university of pennsylvania
law review 743   855.
lauderdale, b. e., and clark, t. s. 2014. scaling politically
meaningful dimensions using texts and votes. american jour-
nal of political science 58(3):754   771.
li, w.; azar, p.; larochelle, d.; hill, p.; cox, j.; berwick, r. c.;
and lo, a. w. 2013. using algorithmic attribution techniques
to determine authorship in unsigned judicial opinions. stanford
technology law review 503   534.
liu, z.; zhang, y.; chang, e. y.; and sun, m.
2011.
plda+: parallel id44 with data place-
acm transactions on in-
ment and pipeline processing.
telligent systems and technology.
software available at
http://code.google.com/p/plda.
lynch, k. j. 2004. best friends     supreme court law clerks on
effective amicus curiae briefs. journal of law & politics 20:33.
martin, a. d., and quinn, k. m. 2002. dynamic ideal point
estimation via id115 for the u.s. supreme
court, 1953   1999. political analysis 10(2):134   153.
mccallum, a.; mann, g.; and druck, g. 2007. generalized
expectation criteria. technical report um-cs-2007-60, uni-
versity of massachusetts, amherst, ma 01003, usa.

