persistent topology of syntax

alexander port, iulia gheorghita, daniel guth, john m. clark, crystal liang,

shival dasu, matilde marcolli

5
1
0
2

 
l
u
j
 

8
1

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
3
1
5
0

.

7
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract. we study the persistent homology of the data set of syntactic parameters of the world
languages. we show that, while homology generators behave erratically over the whole data set,
non-trivial persistent homology appears when one restricts to speci   c language families. di   erent
families exhibit di   erent persistent homology. we focus on the cases of the indo-european and
the niger-congo families, for which we compare persistent homology over di   erent cluster    ltering
values. we investigate the possible signi   cance, in historical linguistic terms, of the presence
of persistent generators of the    rst homology.
in particular, we show that the persistent    rst
homology generator we    nd in the indo-european family is not due (as one might guess) to the
anglo-norman bridge in the indo-european phylogenetic network, but is related to the position
of ancient greek and the hellenic branch within the network.

1. introduction

this project is part of a broader ongoing investigation into the use of methods from data analysis
to identify the presence of structures and relations between the syntactic parameters of the world
languages, considered either globally across all languages, or within speci   c language families and
in comparative analysis between di   erent families.

we analyze the sswl database of syntactic structures of world languages, using methods from
topological data analysis. after performing principal component analysis to reduce the dimen-
sionality of the data set, we compute the persistent homology. the generators behave erratically
when computed over the entire set of languages in the database. however, if restricted to speci   c
language families, non-trivial persistent homology appears, which behaves di   erently for di   erent
families. we focus our analysis on the two largest language families covered by the sswl data-
base: the niger-congo family and the indo-european family. we show that the indo-european
family has a non-trivial persistent generator in the    rst homology. by performing cluster analysis,
we show that the four major language families in the database (indo-european, niger-congo,
austronesian, afro-asiatic) exhibit di   erent cluster structures in their syntactic parameters. this
allows us to focus on speci   c cluster    ltering values, where other non-trivial persistent homology
can be found, in both the indo-european and the niger-congo cases.

this analysis shows that the indo-european family has a non-trivial persistent generator of
the    rst homology, and two persistent generators of the zeroth homology (persistent connected
components), with substructures emerging at speci   c cluster    ltering values. the niger-congo
family, on the other hand, does not show presence of persistent    rst homology, and has one
persistent connected component.

we discuss the possible linguistic signi   cance of persistent connected components and persistent
generators of the    rst homology. we propose an interpretation of persistent components in terms
of subfamilies, and we analyze di   erent possible historical linguistic mechanisms that may give
rise to non-trivial persistent    rst homology.

we focus on the non-trivial persistent    rst homology generator in the indo-european family and
we try to trace its origin in the structure of the phylogenetic network of indo-european languages.
the    rst hypothesis we consider is the possibility that the non-trivial loop in the space of syntactic

1

2

a.port, i.gheorghita, d.guth, j.m.clark, c.liang, s.dasu, m.marcolli

parameters may be a re   ection of the presence of a non-trivial loop in the phylogenetic network,
due to the historical    anglo-norman bridge    connecting french to middle english, hence creating
a non-trivial loop between the latin and the germanic subtrees. however, we show by analyzing
the syntactic parameters of these two subtrees alone that the persistent    rst homology is not
coming from this part of the indo-european family. we show that it is also not coming from the
indo-iranian branch. moreover, we show that adding or removing the hellenic branch from the
remaining group of indo-european languages causes a change in both the persistent    rst homology
and the number of persistent component.

acknowledgment. this work was performed within the activities of the last author   s mathe-
matical and computational linguistics lab and cs101/ma191 class at caltech. the last author
is partially supported by nsf grants dms-1007207, dms-1201512, and phy-1205440.

2. syntactic parameters and data analysis

the idea of codifying di   erent syntactic structures through parameters is central to the princi-
ples and parameters model of syntax, [5], [6], within generative linguistics. in this approach, one
associates to a language a string of binary (   or 0/1 valued) variables, the syntactic parameters,
that encode many features of its syntactic structures. examples of such parameters include subject
verb, which has the value + when in a clause with intransitive verb the order subject verb can be
used; noun possessor, which has value + when a possessor can follow the noun it modi   es; initial
polar q marker, which has value + when a direct yes/no question is marked by a clause initial
question-marker; etc.1 the    syntactic structures of the world   s languages    (sswl) database,
which we used in this investigation, includes a set of 115 di   erent parameters, (partially) mapped
for a set of 252 of the known world languages.

the comparative study of syntactic structures across di   erent world languages plays an impor-
tant role in linguistics, see [13] for a recent extensive treatment. in particular, in this study, we
focus on data of syntactic parameters for two of the major families of world languages: the indo-
european family and the niger-congo family. these are the two families that are best represented
in the sswl database, which includes 79 indo-european languages and 49 niger-congo languages.
the niger-congo family is the largest language family in the world (by number of languages it
comprises). general studies of syntactic structures of niger-congo languages are available, see for
instance [2], [12], though many of the languages within this family are still not very well mapped
when it comes to their syntactic parameters in the sswl database. the indo-european family,
on the other hand, is very extensively studied, and more of the syntactic parameters are mapped.
despite this di   erence, the data available in the sswl database provide enough material for a
comparative data analysis between these two families.

the point of view based on syntactic parameters has also come to play a role in the study of
historical linguistics and language change, see for instance [8]. an excellent expository account
of the parametric approach to syntax is given in [1].

one of the sources of criticism to the principles and parameters model is the lack of a good
understanding of the space of syntactic parameters, [11].
in particular, the theory does not
clearly identify a set of independent binary variables that can be thought of as a    universal set of
parameters   , and relations between syntactic parameters are not su   ciently well understood.

it is only in recent years, however, that accessible online databases of syntactic structures have
become available, such as the wals database of [10] or the sswl database [14]. the existence of

1see http://sswl.railsplayground.net/browse/properties for a list and description of all the syntactic

parameters covered by the sswl database.

persistent topology of syntax

3

figure 1. barcode graph over languages with 60% of parameters known and 60%
of variance preserved; and with 80% of parameters known and 60% of variance
preserved. third graph: barcode for a random subset of 15 languages, 100% of
variance preserved.

databases that record syntactic parameters across di   erent world languages for the    rst time makes
them accessible to techniques of modern data analysis. our hope is that a computational approach,
based on various data analysis techniques applied to the syntactic parameters of world languages,
may help the investigation of possible dependence relations between di   erent parameters and a
better understanding of their overall structure.
in the present study, we focused on the data
collected in the sswl database, and on topological data analysis based on persistent homology.

the structures we observe do not, at present, have a clear explanation in terms of linguistic
theory and of the principles and parameters model of syntax. the presence of persistent homology
in the syntactic parameter data, and its di   erent behavior for di   erent language families begs for a
better understanding of the formation and persistence of topological structures from the historical
linguistics viewpoint, and from the viewpoint of syntactic theory.

3. persistent homology

an important and fast developing area of data analysis, in recent years, has been the study
of high dimensional structures in large sets of data points, via topological methods, see [3], [7],
[9]. these methods of topological data analysis allow one to infer global features from discrete
subsets of data as well as    nd commonalities of discrete sub-objects from a given continuous
object. the techniques developed within this framework have found applications in    elds such
as pure mathematics (geometric group theory, analysis, coarse geometry), as well as in other
sciences (biology, computer science), where one has to deal with large sets of data. topology is

4

a.port, i.gheorghita, d.guth, j.m.clark, c.liang, s.dasu, m.marcolli

figure 2. cluster structure of syntactic parameters for the indo-european, the
niger-congo, the austronesian, and the afro-asiatic language families.

very well-suited in tackling these problems, being qualitative in nature. speci   cally, topological
data analysis achieves its goal by transforming the data set under study into a family of simplicial
complexes, indexed by a proximity parameter. one analyzes said complexes by computing their
persistent homology, and then encoding the persistent homology of the data set in the form of a
parametrized version of a betti number called a barcode graph. such graphs exhibit explicitly the
number of connected components and of higher-dimensional holes in the data. we refer the reader
to [3], [7], [9] for a general overview and a detailed treatment of topological data analysis and
persistent homology. as an example, persistent homology was used recently to study the topology
of a space of 3d images [4], where the authors determined that the barcode representation from
persistent homology matched the homology of a klein bottle.

space en . let d(x, y) = (cid:107)x     y(cid:107) = ((cid:80)n

3.1. the vietoris-rips complex. suppose given a set x = {x  } of points in some euclidean
j=1(xj     yj)2)1/2 denote the euclidean distance function
in en . the vietoris-rips complex r(x,  ) of scale  , over a    eld k, is de   ned as the chain
complex whose space rn(x,  ) of n-simplices corresponds to the k-vector space spanned by all
the unordered (n + 1)-tuples of points {x  0, x  1, . . . , x  n} where each pair x  i, x  j has distance
d(x  i, x  j )      . the boundary maps    n : rn(x,  )     rn   1(x,  ), with    n        n+1 = 0, are the usual
ones determined by the incidence relations of (n + 1) and n-dimensional simplices. for n     0, one

denotes by

persistent topology of syntax

5

hn(x,  ) := hn(r(x,  ),    )

= ker{   n : rn(x,  )     rn   1(x,  )}/range{   n+1 : rn+1(x,  )     rn(x,  )}

the n-th homology with coe   cients in k of the vietoris-rips complex. when the scale   varies, one
obtains a system of inclusion maps between the vietoris-rips complexes, r(x,  1) (cid:44)    r(x,  2),
for  1 <  2. by functoriality of homology, these maps induce corresponding morphisms between
the homologies, hn(x,  1)     hn(x,  2). a homology class in hn(x,  2) that is not in the image
of hn(x,  1) is a birth; a nontrivial homology class in hn(x,  1) that maps to the zero element
of hn(x,  2) is a death, and a nontrivial homology class in hn(x,  1) that maps to a nontrivial
homology class in hn(x,  2) is said to persist. mapping the deaths, births, and persistence of
a set of generators of the homology, as the radius   grows gives rise to a barcode graph for the
betti numbers of these homology groups. those homology generators that survive only over short
intervals of   radii are attributed to noise, while those that persist for longer intervals are considered
to represent actual structure in the data set.

3.2. linguistic signi   cance of persistent homology. when we analyze the persistent topol-
ogy of di   erent linguistic families (see the detailed discussion of results in   5), we    nd di   erent
behaviors, in the number of persistent generators in both h0 and h1. as typically happens in
many data sets, the generators for hn with n     2 behave too erratically to identify any meaningful
structure beyond topological noise.

in general, the rank of the n-th homology group hn of a complex counts the    number of (n + 1)-
in the topological
dimensional holes    that cannot be    lled by an (n + 1)-dimensional patch.
analysis of a point cloud data set, the presence of a non-trivial generator of the hn at a given scale
of the vietoris-rips complex implies the existence of a set of data points that is well described
by an n-dimensional set of parameters, whose shape in the ambient space encloses an (n + 1)-
dimensional hole, which is not    lled by other data in the same set. in this sense, the presence of
generators of persistent homology reveal the presence of structure in the data set.

in our case, the database provides a data point for each recorded world language (or for each
language within a given family), and the data points live in the space of syntactic parameters, or
in a space of a more manageable lower dimension after performing principal component analysis.
in this setting, the presence of an    (n + 1)-dimensional hole    in the data (a generator of the
persistent hn) shows that (part of) the data cluster around an n-dimensional manifold that is not
      lled in    by other data points. possible coordinates on such n-dimensional structures represent
relations among the syntactic parameters, over certain linguistic (sub)families.

since the only persistent generators we encountered are in the h0 and h1, we discuss more in

detail their respective meanings.

3.3. linguistic signi   cance of persistent h0. the rank of the persistent h0 counts the number
of connected components of the vietoris-rips complex. it reveals the presence of clusters of data,
within which data are closer to each other (in the range of scales considered for the vietoris-rips
complex) than to any point in any other component. thus, a language family exhibiting more
than one persistent generator of h0 has linguistic parameters that naturally group together into
di   erent subfamilies. it is not known, at this stage of the analysis, whether in such cases the subsets
of languages that belong to the same connected component correspond to historical linguistic
subfamilies or whether they cut across them. we will give some evidence, in the case of the indo-
european family, in favor of matching persistent generators of the h0 to major historical linguistic
sub-families within the same family. certainly, in all cases, the connected components identi   ed

6

a.port, i.gheorghita, d.guth, j.m.clark, c.liang, s.dasu, m.marcolli

figure 3. two models of the development of a non-trivial loop in the space of
parameters.

by di   erent generators of the persistent h0 can be used to de   ne a grouping into subfamilies,
whose relation to historical linguistics remains to be investigated.

3.4. linguistic signi   cance of persistent h1. the presence of an h1-generators also means
that part of the data (corresponding to one of the components of the vietoris-rips complex)
clusters around a one-dimensional closed curve. more precisely, one can identify the    rst homology
group h1(x) of a space with the group of homotopy classes [x, s1] of (basepoint preserving) maps
f : x     s1 to the circle. this means that, if there is a non-trivial generator of the persistent h1,
then there is a choice of a circle coordinate that best describes that part of the data. the freedom to
change the map up to homotopy makes it possible to look for a smoothing of the circle coordinate.
it is not obvious how to interpret these circles from the linguistic point of view. the fact that
a generator of the h1 represents a 2-dimensional hole means that, given the data that cluster
along this circle, no further data point determine a 2-dimensional surface interpolating across the
circle. as the topological structures we are investigating stem from a vietoris-rips complex that
measures proximity between syntactic parameters of di   erent languages, we can propose a heuristic
interpretation for the presence of such circles as the case of a (sub)family of languages where each
language in the subfamily has other    neighboring    languages with su   ciently similar syntactic
parameters, so that one can go around the whole subfamily via changes of syntactic parameters
described by a single circle coordinate, while parameter changes that move along two-dimensional
manifolds and interpolate between data points on the circle cannot be performed while remain
within the same (sub)family.

two di   erent possible models of how a non-trivial generator of the persistent    rst homology
can arise point to di   erent possible explanations in historical-linguistic terms. as shown in figure
3, the    rst model is a typical hopf bifurcation picture, where a circle arises from a point (with
the horizontal direction as time coordinate). this model would be compatible with a phylogenetic
network of the corresponding language family that is a tree, where one of the nodes generates a
set of daughter nodes whose points in the parameter space contain a nontrivial loop. the second
possibility is of a line closing up into a circle. this may arise in the case of a language family
whose phylogenetic network is not a tree, but it contains itself a loop that closes o    two previously
distant branches. there are well known cases where the phylogenetic network of a language family
is not necessarily best described by a tree. the most famous case is probably the anglo-norman
bridge in the phylogenetic    tree    of the indo-european languages, see figure 4. however, it is
important to point out that the presence of a loop in the phylogenetic network of a language
family does not imply that this loop will leave a trace in the syntactic parameters, in the form
of a non-trivial    rst persistent homology. conversely, the presence of persistent    rst homology,
by itself, is no guarantee that loops may be present in the phylogenetic network, for example due
to possibilities like the hopf bifurcation picture described above. thus, one cannot infer directly
from the presence or absence of a persistent h1 conclusions about the topology of the historical

persistent topology of syntax

7

figure 4. the family    tree    of the indo-european languages (by jack lynch)
showing the loop between the latin and the germanic subtrees.

phylogenetic network. the only conclusion of this sort that can be drawn is that a persistent h1
suggests a phylogenetic loop as one of the possible causes. conversely, one can read the absence
of non-trivial persistent    rst homology as a suggestion (but not an implication) of the fact that
the phylogenetic network may be a tree and that phenomena like the anglo-norman bridge did
not occur in the historical development of that family.

we will discuss this point more in detail in the case of the indo-european language family. this
is a very good example, which shows how the possible correlation between loops in the space of
syntactic parameters and in the phylogenetic network is by no means an implication.
indeed,
the indo-european language family contains both a known loop in the phylogenetic network, due
to the anglo-norman bridge (see figure 4), and a non-trivial generator of the persistent h1.
however, we will show using our topological data analysis method that these two loops are in fact
unrelated, contrary to what intuition might have suggested.

4. data analysis procedure

the sswl database [14] was    rst imported into a pivot table in excel. the on-o    parameters
are represented in binary, in order to compute the distances between languages. however, the
parameter values are not known for many of the languages in the database: over one hundred
of the languages have, at present, less than half of their parameters known. thus, we decided
to replace empty language parameters with a value of 0.5. all together, we ended up with 252
languages, each with 115 di   erent parameters.

8

a.port, i.gheorghita, d.guth, j.m.clark, c.liang, s.dasu, m.marcolli

figure 5. barcode diagram for the indo-european language family, at indices
(7, 5, 96), (10, 0, 96), and (10, 5, 98).

we then proceeded to our analysis based on the results from perseus homology software [15].
this is achieved through a series of matlab scripts2. the script named data select full.m allows
for selection of subsets of the raw data. it performs principal component analysis on the raw
parameter data and saves it to a text    le for use in perseus. the format of the data is that of
a vietoris-rips complex. this script has two important parameters: a completeness threshold,
and a percent variance to preserve. the completeness threshold removes the languages below a
threshold of known parameters. the percent variance allows us to reduce the dimensionality of
our data.

the next script, named barcode.m, was used to create barcode graphs for data visualization.
perseus outputs the birth and death times for each persistent homology generator, which are then
used to construct the barcode graph of the persistence intervals to visualize the structure and

2a repository of the code used for this project is available at

https://github.com/cosmicomic/cs101-project5

persistent topology of syntax

9

figure 6. barcode diagram for the indo-european language family, for cluster
   ltering value 165 at indices (7, 5, 95) and (10, 5, 95).

determine the generators. the radii in our complexes are incremented by 1% of the mean distance
between languages.

data analysis was initially set up as a three step process: select the data with the script
data select full.m, analyze it with perseus, and use barcode.m to visualize the results. the
   nal script, named run all, streamlines this process under a single input command.

finally, our analysis includes examining how many data points belong to clusters of points at
any given radius. clusters are constructed by creating n-spheres of uniform radius centered at
each data point. if the n-spheres of two data points overlap, then those data points are in the
same cluster. a non-trivial cluster is a cluster with at least two data points contained within.
the scripts group select.m and graph clusters.m make it possible to visualize the number of
clusters and non-trivial clusters as radius increases.

5. the persistent topology of linguistic families

a preliminary analysis performed over the entire set of languages in the sswl database shows
that the non-trivial homology generators of h1 and h2 behave erratically. moreover, there are
too many generators of h2 and h3 to draw any meaningful conclusion about the structure of the
underlying topological space. one can see the typical behavior represented in figure 1. in the
   rst graph of figure 1 we included the languages with more than 60% of the parameters known,
while in the second we removed all languages with more than 20% of the parameters unaccounted
for. here percentage of parameters is with respect to the largest number of syntactic parameters
considered in the sswl database. one can compare this with the case of a randomly generated
subset of languages, presented in the third graph of figure 1. notice that, while in the cases
represented in the    rst two graphs of figure 1 there is    noise    in the h1 and h2 region, that
prevents a clear identi   cation of persistent generators, the homology of random subsets of the
data, as displayed in the third graph of figure 1, is relatively sparse, containing only topologically
trivial information. this observation lead us to the hypothesis that the behavior seen in figure
1 stems from a superposition of some more precise, but non-uniform, topological information
associated to the various di   erent linguistic families. in order to test this hypothesis, we decided
to examine speci   c language families as an additional method of data    ltering. we chose the four
largest families represented in the original database: indo-european with 79 languages, niger-
congo with 49, austronesian with 18, and afro-asiatic with 14. although some of the languages

10

a.port, i.gheorghita, d.guth, j.m.clark, c.liang, s.dasu, m.marcolli

figure 7. barcode diagram for the niger-congo language family, at indices
(7, 5, 107), (10, 0, 100), and (10, 5, 105).

in the database included latitude and longitude coordinates, these were ignored when determining
language family.

5.1. cluster structures in major language families. a    rst observation, when comparing
syntactic parameters of di   erent linguistic families, is that they exhibit di   erent cluster structure
of the syntactic parameters. this is illustrated in figure 2, in the case of the our largest families
in the sswl database.

based on this cluster analysis, we then focused on the cases of the indo-european and the
niger-congo language family and we searched for nontrivial generators of the    rst homology h1
in appropriate ranges of cluster    ltering.

the cluster analysis of figure 2 suggests that cluster    lter values between 150 and 200 should
provide interesting information. we computed additional barcode diagrams corresponding to
cluster    ltering values 165 and 190.

persistent topology of syntax

11

figure 8. barcode diagram for the niger-congo language family, for cluster    lter-
ing value 165 and indices (7, 3, 100) and (10, 0, 100), and for cluster    ltering value
190 and indices (7, 5, 104) and (10, 0, 104).

5.2. indexing in barcode graphs. in the graphs presented in the following subsection, the
barcode graphs are labeled by a set of three indices. the    rst two indices refer to the principal
component analysis and the third index to the runs of the perseus program computing births
and deaths of homology generators of the vietoris-rips complex. more precisely, the    rst index
(7 or 10) refers to the percent variance divided by 10, while the second index (0, 3 or 5) refers
to the percent complete divided by 10. they are discussed above in   4. the third parameter is
the number of steps in perseus. if present, the additional parameter given by the number after
   cluster    is one hundred times the radius used for cluster    ltering.

5.3. persistent topology of the indo-european family. we analyzed the persistent homol-
ogy of the syntactic parameters for the indo-european language family. as shown in figure 5, at
values (7, 5, 96) and (10, 0, 96) one sees persistent generators of h0 and intervals in the varying
n-sphere radius, for which nontrivial h1 generators exist. at values (10, 5, 98), as shown in figure
5, one sees one persistent generator of h1 and two persistent generators of h0. the existence of
a persistent generator for the h1 suggests that there should be a    circle coordinate    description
for at part of the syntactic parameters of the indo-european languages. the fact that there are
two persistent generators of h0 in the same diagram indicates two connected components, only
one of which is a circle: this component determines which subset of syntactic parameters admits
a parameterization by values of a circle coordinate.

12

a.port, i.gheorghita, d.guth, j.m.clark, c.liang, s.dasu, m.marcolli

figure 9. barcode diagram for the latin+germanic languages, at indices
(7, 5, 129) and (10, 5, 130).

based on the cluster analysis described in   5.1 above, we then focused on speci   c regions of
cluster    ltering values that were more likely to exhibit interesting topology. for example, for
cluster    ltering value 165, the results show, respectively, one generator of h0 and one generator
of h1, for indices (7, 5, 95), and one generator of h0 and a possibility of two persistent generators
of the h1, for indices (10, 5, 95), see figure 6. the appearance of persistent generators of the h1
as speci   c cluster    ltering values identi   es other groups of syntactic parameters that may admit
circle variable parameterizations. what these topological structures in the space of syntactic
parameters, and these subsets admitting circle variables description, mean in terms of linguistic
theory remains to be fully understood. we analyze some historical-linguistic hypotheses in the
following subsection.

5.4. indo-european persistent topology and historical linguistics. it is often argued that
the phylogenetic    tree    of the family of indo-european languages should not really be a tree,
because of the historical in   uence of french on middle english, see figure 6, which can be viewed
as creating a bridge (sometimes referred to as the anglo-norman bridge) connecting the latin and
the germanic subtrees and introducing non-trivial topology in the indo-european phylogenetic
network. it is well known that the in   ux of french was extensive at the lexical level, but it is
not clear whether one should expect to see a trace of this historical phenomenon when analyzing
languages at the level of syntactic structures. it is, however, a natural question to ask whether the
non-trivial loop one sees in the persistent topology of syntactic parameters of the indo-european
family may perhaps be a syntactic remnant of the anglo-norman bridge.

however, a further analysis of the sswl dataset of syntactic parameters appears to exclude
this possibility.
indeed, we computed the persistent homology using only the indo-european
languages in the latin and germanic groups. if the persistent generator of h1 were due to the
anglo-norman bridge one would still    nd this non-trivial generator when using only this group of
languages, while what we    nd is that the group of latin and germanic languages alone carry no
non-trivial persistent    rst homology, see figure 9.

in order to understand the nature of the two persistent generators of h0, we separated out the
indo-iranian subfamily of the indo-european family, to test whether the two persistent connected
components would be related to the natural subdivision into the two main branches of the indo-
european family. even though the indo-iranian branch is the largest subfamily of indo-european
languages, it is much less extensively mapped in sswl than the rest of the indo-european family,

persistent topology of syntax

13

figure 10. barcode diagram for the indo-european family with the indo-iranian
subfamily removed, at indices (7, 5, 97).

with only 9 languages recorded in the database. thus, a topological data analysis performed
directly on the indo-iranian subfamily is less reliable, but one can gain su   cient information by
analyzing the remaining set of indo-european languages, after removing the indo-iranian subfam-
ily. the result is illustrated in figure 10. we see that indeed the number of persistent connected
component is now just one, which supports the proposal of relating persistent generators of h0
to major subdivisions into historical linguistic subfamilies. moreover, the persistent generator
of the h1 is still present, which shows that the non-trivial    rst homology is not located in the
indo-iranian subfamily.

in order to understand more precisely where the non-trivial persistent    rst homology is located
in the indo-european family, we performed the analysis again, after removing the indo-iranian
languages and also removing the hellenic branch, including both ancient and modern greek. the
resulting persistent topology is illustrated in figure 11. by comparing figures 10 and 11 one
sees that the position of the hellenic branch of the indo-european family has a direct role in
determining the persistent topology. when this subfamily is removed, the number of persistent
connected components (generators of h0) jumps from one to three, while the non-trivial single
generator of h1 disappears. although this observation by itself does not provide an explanation
of the persistent topology in terms of historical linguistics of the indo-european family, it points
to the fact that, if historical linguistic phenomena are involved in determining the topology, they
appear to be related to the role that ancient greek and the hellenic branch played in the historical
development of the indo-european languages.

when performing a more detailed cluster analysis on the indo-european family, one    nds sub-
structures in the persistent topology. for instance, as shown in figure 6, one sees a possible
second generator of the persistent h1 for cluster    ltering value 165, with indices (10, 5, 95). these
substructures may also be possible traces of other historical linguistic phenomena.

14

a.port, i.gheorghita, d.guth, j.m.clark, c.liang, s.dasu, m.marcolli

figure 11. barcode diagram for the indo-european family with the indo-iranian
and the hellenic subfamilies removed, at indices (7, 5, 96).

5.5. persistent topology of the niger-congo family. we performed the same type of analysis
on the syntactic parameters of the niger-congo language family. the interesting result we observed
is that the behavior of persistent homology seems to be quite di   erent for di   erent language
families. figure 7 shows the barcode diagrams for persistent homology at index values (7, 5, 107),
(10, 0, 100), and (10, 5, 105), which can be compared with the diagrams of figure 5 for the indo-
european family. in the niger-congo family, we now see persistent h0 homology, respectively, of
ranks 1, 3, and 1 (compare with ranks 2, 3, 2 in the indo-european case). a lower rank in the h0
means fewer connected components in the vietoris-rips complex, which seems to indicate that the
syntactic parameters are more concentrated and homogeneously distributed across the linguistic
family, and less    spread out    into di   erent sub-clusters.

following the cluster analysis of   5.1, we also considered the persistent homology for the niger-
congo family at speci   c cluster    ltering values. while for cluster    ltering value 165 and indices
(7, 3, 100) one sees one persistent generator of h0 and a possibility of a persistent generator in the
h1, cluster    ltering value 165 with indices (10, 0, 100), as well as cluster    ltering value 190 with
indices (7, 5, 104) and (10, 0, 104) only show one persistent generator in the h0.

this persistent homology viewpoint seems to suggest that syntactic parameters within the
niger-congo language family may be spread out more evenly across the family than they are in
the indo-european case, with a single persistent connected component, whereas the indo-european
ones have two di   erent persistent connected component, one of which has circle topology.

6. further questions

we showed that methods from topological data analysis, in particular persistent homology, can
be used to analyze how syntactic parameters are distributed over di   erent language families. in
particular we compared the cases of indo-european and niger-congo languages.

persistent topology of syntax

15

we list here some questions that naturally arise from this perspective, which we believe are

worthy of further investigation.

(1) to what extent do persistent generators of the h0 (that is, the persistent connected com-
ponents) of the data space of syntactic parameter correspond to di   erent (sub)families of
languages in the historical linguistic sense? for example, are the three h0 generators visi-
ble at scale (10, 0, 100) in the congo-niger family a remnant of the historical subdivision
into the mande, atlantic-congo, and kordofanian subfamilies?

(2) what is the meaning, in historical linguistic terms, of the circle components (persistent
generators of h1) in the data space of syntactic parameters of language families? is there a
historical-linguistic interpretation for the second h1 generator one sees at cluster    ltering
value 165 and scale (10, 5, 95) in the indo-european family? or for the h1 generator one
sees with the same cluster    ltering, at scale (7, 3, 100) in the niger-congo case?

(3) to what extent does persistent topology describe di   erent distribution of syntactic param-

eters across languages for di   erent linguistic families?

references

[1] m. baker, the atoms of language, basic books, 2001.
[2] j. bendor-samuel, the niger-congo languages: a classi   cation and description of africa   s largest language

family, university press of america, 1989.

[3] g. carlsson, topology and data, bulletin of the american mathematical society, vol. 46 (2009) n.2, 255   308.
[4] g. carlsson, t. ishkhanov, v. de silva, a. zomorodian, on the local behavior of spaces of natural images, int.

j. comput. vis., vol.76 (2008) 1   12.

[5] n. chomsky, lectures on government and binding, dordrecht: foris publications, 1982.
[6] n. chomsky, h. lasnik, the theory of principles and parameters, in    syntax: an international handbook of

contemporary research   , pp.506   569, de gruyter, 1993.

[7] h. edelsbrunner, j.l. harer, computational topology: an introduction, american mathematical society, 2010.
[8] c. galves (ed.) parameter theory and linguistic change, oxford university press, 2012.
[9] r. ghrist, elementary applied topology, createspace, 2014.
[10] m. haspelmath, m.s. dryer, d. gil, b. comrie, the world atlas of language structures, oxford university

press, 2005.

[11] m. haspelmath, parametric versus functional explanations of syntactic universals, in    the limits of syntactic

variation   , pp. 75   107, john benjamins, 2008.

[12] v. manfredi, k. reynolds, (eds.) niger-congo syntax and semantics, boston university, african studies

center, 1995.

[13] t. shopen, language typology and syntactic description: volume 1, clause structure; volume 2, complex

constructions; volume 3: grammatical categories and lexicon, cambridge university press, 2007.

[14] sswl database of syntactic parameters:

http://sswl.railsplayground.net/
[15] perseus software package for persistent homology
http://www.sas.upenn.edu/   vnanda/perseus/

division of physics, mathematics and astronomy, caltech, 1200 e. california blvd. pasadena,

ca 91125, usa

e-mail address: aport@caltech.edu
e-mail address: igheorgh@caltech.edu
e-mail address: dguth@caltech.edu
e-mail address: jmclark@caltech.edu
e-mail address: clliang@caltech.edu
e-mail address: sdasu@caltech.edu
e-mail address: matilde@caltech.edu

