squinky! a corpus of sentence-level formality,

informativeness, and implicature

shibamouli lahiri

computer science and engineering

university of michigan
ann arbor, mi 48109
lahiri@umich.edu

6
1
0
2

 

p
e
s
7
2

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
6
0
3
2
0

.

6
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

we introduce a corpus of 7,032 sentences1
rated by human annotators for formality, in-
formativeness, and implicature on a 1-7 scale.
the corpus was annotated using amazon me-
chanical turk.2 reliability in the obtained
judgments was examined by comparing mean
ratings across two mturk experiments, and
correlation with pilot annotations (on sentence
formality) conducted in a more controlled set-
ting. despite the subjectivity and inherent dif-
   culty of the annotation task, correlations be-
tween mean ratings were quite encouraging,
especially on formality and informativeness.
we further explored correlation between the
three linguistic variables, genre-wise variation
of ratings and correlations within genres, com-
patibility with automatic stylistic scoring, and
sentential make-up of a document in terms
of style. to date, our corpus is the largest
sentence-level annotated corpus released for
formality, informativeness, and implicature.

introduction

1
consider the two following utterances:3

1. this is to inform you that
your book has been rejected
by our publishing company as
it was not up to the required

1a more recent (aug 30, 2016) version of this paper
appears at http://web.eecs.umich.edu/  lahiri/
new_draft.pdf.

2https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome.
3courtesy:

http://www.word-mart.com/html/

formal_and_informal_writing.html

standard. in case you would
like us to reconsider it, we
would suggest that you go over
it and make some necessary
changes.

2. you know that book i wrote?
well, the publishing company
rejected it. they thought it
was awful. but hey, i did the
best i could, and i think it
was great. i   m not gonna redo
it the way they said i should.

not only are the styles of the two utterances dif-
ferent (   rst one is formal, second one is informal),
but they are also targeted at different people. this
dichotomy of (in)formal expressions was examined
in great detail by heylighen and dewaele (1999).
as they observed, formality is the most important
dimension of writing style (cf. (biber, 1988; hud-
son, 1994)),4 and has close connections to infor-
mativeness and implicature. they argued, in par-
ticular, that formality emerges out of a communica-
tive objective     to maximize the amount of informa-
tion being conveyed to the listener while at the same
time maintaining (or at least appearing to maintain)
grice   s communicative maxims of quality, quan-
tity, relevance and manner as much as possible
(grice, 1975).

heylighen and dewaele introduced the notion of
deep formality        avoidance of ambiguity by mini-
mizing the context-dependence and fuzziness of ex-

4for a general discussion on the theory of registers, see

(levelt, 1989) and (leckie-tarry and birch, 1995).

pression   , and reasoned that the other type of for-
mality (surface formality; formalizing language for
stylistic effects) is a corruption of the language   s
original deep purpose. deep formality was charac-
terized by a lack of contextuality, evidenced in par-
ticular by decreased levels of deixis and implicature
in linguistic realizations.

while several of the arguments heylighen and
dewaele made are open to question, an important
take-home message from their theory is a so-called
continuum of formality, arising out of a process
where a document (or a piece of text) can be    for-
malized    ad in   nitum, simply by adding more and
more context. this precludes us from labeling a doc-
ument or a sentence binarily as    formal    or    infor-
mal   . we will instead follow the likert scale ap-
proach (likert, 1932) to sentence formality annota-
tion, shown to work well by lahiri and lu (2011).
in some sense, our work is similar to the stanford
politeness corpus (danescu-niculescu-mizil et al.,
2013); both corpora are at the sentence/utterance
level, and both measure a pragmatic variable on an
ordinal scale (formality vs politeness).

2 background and related work
2.1 formality
heylighen and dewaele   s study, while seminal in the
   eld of formality scoring, had its limitations. al-
though they stressed the relationship between con-
textuality (missing information) and implicature, it
was never quanti   ed. they also refrained from
quantifying implicature itself     to    avoid all intri-
cacies at the level of id102, syntax, semantics
and pragmatics   , citing that the    recognition of pho-
netic patterns, syntactical parsing, and even more se-
mantic and pragmatic interpretation of natural lan-
guage are still extremely dif   cult. . . to perform au-
tomatically.    further, we suspect that the relation
between deep formality and implicature might have
been over-emphasized (cf. section 4.2).

in the end, they quanti   ed formality using deixis
only (percentage difference between deictic and
non-deictic parts-of-speech), which we will hence-
forth refer to as the    f-score   .5 f-score was used in
genre analysis by nowson et al. (2005), and shown

to be quite effective in discriminating between the
17 genres used in their study. further, systematic
variation in f-score was observed across gender and
personality traits. teddiman (2009) noted in partic-
ular that f-score can successfully differentiate be-
tween genres, but it cannot explain why the genres
are different. f-score was found to be the same for
diary entries, and comments on those entries.6
in
follow-up work, li et al. (2013) proposed a version
of f-score (called    cf-score   ) based on coh-metrix
(graesser et al., 2004) dimensions of narrativity, ref-
erential and deep cohesion, syntactic simplicity and
word concreteness. cf-score was better able to dis-
criminate between genres than f-score.

in a separate strand of work, brooke and hirst
(2014) identi   ed formality as a continuous lexi-
cal attribute, and assigned a formality score to a
word based on its co-occurrece frequency with a
hand-picked seed set of formal and informal words,
smoothed by latent semantic analysis (brooke et al.,
2010). formality of words was further shown to
be correlated with other stylistic dimensions such
as concreteness and subjectivity (brooke and hirst,
2013).

while all the above studies are very important,
they looked at formality from document and word
levels, not from the sentence level. abu sheikha
and inkpen (2012) equated formality of a sentence
with the formality of its corresponding document,
and brooke and hirst (2014) predicted formality of
sentences using word-level features. peterson et al.
(2011) and machili (2014) looked into formality of
emails at workplace, the former exploring the en-
ron corpus and how formality varies with social dis-
tance, relative power, and the weight of imposition,
and the latter conducting similar analyses among
workplace emails from greek multinational compa-
nies.

as lahiri et al. (2011) showed in their work, sen-
tence formality is not the same as document for-
mality. while it is true that sentences do follow
document-level trends, it was observed that there is
a wide spread among sentences in terms of formal-
ity     not all sentences from a document are equally
formal (cf. (lahiri and lu, 2011), and section 4.3

5not to be confused with the harmonic mean of precision

6this could be due to linguistic style co-ordination

and recall.

(danescu-niculescu-mizil, 2012).

of this paper). lahiri and lu (2011) further showed
that there are cases where the words in a sentence
are formal, but the sentence as a whole is not (   for
all the stars in the sky, i do not care.   )     thus raising
questions regarding a straightforward application of
lexical formality to explain sentence formality.7

the only two studies we are aware of that looked
into formality annotation of sentences, are (lahiri
and lu, 2011), and (dethlefs et al., 2014). lahiri
and lu annotated 600 sentences by two undergrad-
uate linguistics students on a likert scale of 1-5.
inter-rater agreement was shown to improve sub-
stantially from binary annotations, which could be
attributed to the continuum of formality phenomenon
described in section 1. dethlefs et al., on the other
hand, were interested in formality from a natural
language generation (id86) perspective.8 they an-
notated utterances using amazon mechanical turk
on three dimensions of style     colloquialism (oppo-
site of formality), politeness, and naturalness. a 1-5
likert scale was used. the problem with this study
is that the number of annotated sentences was quite
limited, and they came from a restricted class of doc-
uments talking about restaurant reviews in a single
city. this makes dethlefs et al.   s corpus unsuitable
for our purpose. we wanted a generic corpus of sen-
tences annotated with formality ratings that could
help build a sentence formality predictor, so we ex-
tended the work of lahiri and lu (2011) instead.

implicature

2.2
a second issue with heylighen and dewaele   s f-
score is that it is unreliable on small documents,
such as sentences and utterances (cf. (lahiri et al.,
2011)). it is therefore of interest to examine if the
f-score correlates with human notion of formality
at sentence level (cf. section 4.2). but perhaps even
more importantly, it shows a big limitation in the for-
mulation of f-score: it is based on deixis only, and
fails to take into account the amount of implicature
present in a sentence.

note that in general, it is true that as we add more
context to a document (or a sentence), it tends to be-
come longer. the opposite is also true: as we rob

7also see the examples given by potts (2012).
8note that the importance of formality in language genera-
tion has long been recognized (hovy, 1990; abu sheikha and
inkpen, 2011).

a document (or sentence) of context, it tends to be-
come shorter (contextual). so it could be reasoned
that sentences by themselves have a lot of un-stated
context (as compared to a document), which are re-
solved by looking at neighboring sentences.9 so if
we could somehow estimate the amount of    miss-
ing    context in a sentence, we would be one more
step ahead in assessing its true formality.

quantifying the missing context is complicated
by the fact that it depends on both deixis and impli-
cature. while f-score gives a reasonable estimate of
the amount of relative deixis present in a sentence, it
does not give any estimate of the amount of implica-
ture. this forced us to rate sentences for the amount
of implicature they carry (on likert scale, because
implicature is a continuous attribute (degen, 2015)).
this annotation process not only gave us implicature
ratings, but also allowed us to look into how subjec-
tive the concept of implicature is (cf. section 3.2).

note that degen (2015) had already conducted a
similar study on implicature annotation using me-
chanical turk. however, the focus of her study was
on one particular type of implicature (some but not
all), and the annotation process was not tied to for-
mality or any other stylistic attribute. also to be
noted is the fact that our annotated corpus of 7,032
sentences is much larger than degen   s corpus of
1,363 utterances.

a general discussion of the vast literature on im-
plicature (starting with grice (1975), and expanded
by harnish (1976), among others) is beyond the
scope of this paper. interested readers are referred
to the excellent book by potts (2005) for a gentle
introduction to the theory of conventional implica-
tures (cis), and to (levin and prince, 1986; benotti,
2010; benotti and blackburn, 2011) for a discussion
on causal implicatures. grice also introduced scalar
implicatures     arguably the most prominent class of
implicatures     that equate    some    with    not all    for
the sake of politeness. papafragou and musolino
(2003) discussed the acquisition of scalar implica-
tures by children, and carston (1998) related scalar
implicatures with relevance and informativeness     a
topic we will brie   y visit in the next section.

apart from degen (2015), we are not aware of any

9much like resolving the meaning of a word by looking at

neighboring words.

work that speci   cally looked into implicature rating
at sentence/utterance level. degen   s work, as we al-
ready pointed out, is not tied to formality scoring, so
we used our own dataset of 7,032 sentences to rate
for both formality and implicature.

2.3

informativeness

we also rated sentences for informativeness     a trait
heylighen and dewaele (1999) identi   ed with deep
formality, where language is formalized to commu-
nicate meaning more clearly and directly. we will
test this hypothesis by checking if the formality of
a sentence positively correlates with its informative-
ness (section 4.2). interestingly, carston (1998) in-
dependently arrived at a similar conclusion:    infor-
mativeness principles. . . give rise to. . . a strengthen-
ing or narrowing down of the encoded meaning of
the utterance.    while carston   s speci   c argument
was tied to scalar implicatures, it is not very far-
fetched to see that the same argument would, in ef-
fect, also apply to deep formality as evinced by hey-
lighen and dewaele.

it is to be noted that the word informativeness
has different connotations in different settings.
in
the machine translation community, for example, the
word informativeness denotes a type of    delity mea-
sure to be applied to the translated text     in order
to verify how much content of the original text is
preserved under the translation (rajman and hart-
informativeness of words and phrases
ley, 2001).
is an important parameter in problems ranging from
named entity detection (rennie and jaakkola, 2005)
to keyword extraction (timonen et al., 2012). under
this setting, informativeness is known as term infor-
mativeness (kireyev, 2009; wu and giles, 2013). in-
terestingly, rennie and jaakkola (2005) pointed out
that their term informativeness estimation approach
would be especially helpful in    extracting informa-
tion from informal, written communication    (em-
phasis ours).

while all the above studies are important in their
own right, and ground-breaking in some cases, we
found none that speci   cally looked into informative-
ness rating of sentences in the context of formality,
and there is no publicly available annotated dataset
for sentence informativeness. in this work, we will
bridge the gap.

3 corpus creation
3.1 data
our data comes from the pioneering study of lahiri
et al. (2011). they compiled four different datasets
    blog posts, news articles, academic papers, and
online forum threads     each consisting of 100 doc-
uments. for the blog dataset, they collected most
recent posts from the top 100 blogs listed by tech-
norati10 on october 31, 2009. for the news arti-
cle dataset, they collected 100 news articles from
20 news sites (   ve from each). the articles were
mostly from    breaking news   ,    recent news   , and
   local news    categories, with no speci   c prefer-
ence attached to any particular category.11 for the
academic paper dataset, they randomly sampled 100
papers from the citeseerx12 digital library. for the
online forum dataset, they sampled 50 random doc-
uments crawled from the ubuntu forums,13 and 50
random documents crawled from the tripadvisor
new york forum.14 the blog, news, paper, and fo-
rum datasets had 2110, 3009, 161406 and 2569 sen-
tences respectively.

we manually cleaned and sentence-segmented the
blog, news, and forum datasets to come up with
7,032 unique sentences. the much larger and more
complex paper dataset was discarded, because man-
ual cleansing and sentence segmentation of text
data extracted from pdf was prohibitively time-
consuming, and often unsuccessful because of spu-
rious characters, words, and corrupted/missing seg-
ments of text.15

3.2 annotation
with the 7,032 sentences, we conducted two me-
chanical turk annotation experiments. in our    rst

10http://technorati.com/.
11the news sites were id98, cbs news, abc news,
reuters, bbc news online, new york times, los ange-
les times, the guardian (u.k.), voice of america, boston
globe, chicago tribune, san francisco chronicle, times on-
line (u.k.), news.com.au, xinhua, the times of india, seattle
post intelligencer, daily mail, and bloomberg l.p.

12http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/.
13http://ubuntuforums.org/.
14http://www.tripadvisor.com/showforum-

g60763-i5-new_york_city_new_york.html.

15note that this manual cleaning was necessary for our anno-
tation process, because we cannot expect our annotators to deal
with corrupt/incomplete/inaccurate sentences.

formality
informativeness
implicature

overall blog news forum
0.48
0.63
0.11

0.68
0.64
0.14

0.60
0.63
0.19

0.35
0.42
0.09

table 1: spearman   s    between the mean ratings obtained from our mechanical turk experiments. all
results are statistically signi   cantly different from zero, with p-value < 0.0001.

mturk experiment 1
mturk experiment 2

overall blog news forum
0.49
0.53

0.32*
0.30*

0.78
0.73

0.73
0.61

table 2: spearman   s    between the mean formality ratings from mechanical turk, and mean formality
ratings from lahiri and lu (2011). all results are statistically signi   cantly different from zero, with p-value
< 0.0001. for the results marked with a *, their p-values are < 0.01.

experiment, turkers were requested to rate sen-
tences on a 1-7 scale for formality, informativeness,
and implicature. each sentence was a hit (hu-
man intelligence task), and we requested    ve as-
signments per hit so that we could get    ve inde-
pendent ratings for each sentence. we requested
turkers with english as    rst language in our hit
title16 and description,17 but there was no easy way
to ensure that it was indeed the case. as a quick
   x, we required    turkers from us    as quali   cation,
and hoped that the average across    ve independent
ratings will paint a better picture than any individ-
ual rating alone. our instructions were minimal    
we started with the two examples given at the be-
ginning of section 1 to prime the turkers with the
notion of formality, and gave them a few more links
to explore the concept on their own.18 then we told
them to rate sentences on how formal they are. turk-
ers were requested to be consistent in their ratings
across sentences, and rate sentences independently

16how formal is this sentence?

english

as first language required.

17this is a formality survey hit, where
we have three stylistic questions on an
english sentence.
you do not have english as first language.

please do not enter if

18http://www.engvid.com/english-
resource/formal-informal-english/,
//dictionary.cambridge.org/us/grammar/
british-grammar/formal-and-informal-
language,
informal-language/,
com/how/formal-informal-english.htm.

http://www.englishspark.com/
http://www.antimoon.

http:

of each other. the order of presentation of the sen-
tences was scrambled so as to remove any potential
sequence effect. in total, 527 turkers participated in
our    rst experiment.

note, however, that assessing inter-rater agree-
ment becomes dif   cult on mechanical turk because
different turkers work on different number of hits.
furthermore, we had no quality control other than
   us-based    in our    rst experiment. this is why we
conducted a second experiment, which was essen-
tially identical to the    rst, except that now we added
two more requirements     at least 1,000 hits com-
pleted with at least 99% approval rate     on top of the
us-based requirement. this resulted in 187 turkers
participating in our second experiment.

correlations between the mean ratings obtained
from these two experiments are shown in table 1.
several things are to be noted from this table. first,
note that even without quality control (and weak
enforcement of the english-   rst-language policy),
turkers    mean ratings correlated pretty well (across
two experiments) for both formality as well as infor-
mativeness, echoing previous    ndings by lahiri and
lu (2011). second, it shows that even without exten-
sive and detailed instructions, turkers were able to
rate subjective concepts like    formality    and    infor-
mativeness    quite well, again echoing the    ndings
summarized by lahiri and lu. note that we did not
provide turkers with extensive and detailed instruc-
tions because:

formality

informativeness

high

and in its middle-class neighborhoods, baghdad is a city
of surprising topiary sculptures: leafy    cus trees are
carved in geometric spirals, balls, arches and squares, as
if to impose order on a chaotic sprawl.

according to the shanghai jiao tong university press,
the press is currently compiling a picture album of qian
and a collection of his writings based on 800-plus-page
documents retrieved from the u.s. national archives,
which include details about his encounters with the u.s.
government and his trip back home.

implicature

who will join?

low

thanx!

any recommendations?

most mornings they rise before their rooster crows, bolting
down a meager breakfast of coconut and chile-spiced
vegetables over rice before venturing out on their journey:
rowing to school aboard a hand-carved 15-foot sampan.

table 3: example sentences with high and low mean mturk ratings for formality, informativeness, and
implicature.

    we did not want to bias them with our view of
the english language (removing experimenter
bias).

    we wanted to see if likert scale annotations
were good enough (as claimed by lahiri and lu
(2011)) to instil suf   cient reliability and agree-
ment in the annotation process, especially be-
tween mean ratings.

    we wanted to see if mean ratings across mul-
tiple raters could effectively eliminate the id-
iosyncrasies of individual turkers in a subjec-
tive annotation task like this.19

having said that, note from table 1 that the corre-
lation values for implicature are rather low     across
all genres (albeit positive). this is unsurprising,
however, given that implicature is arguably the most
subjective among the three pragmatic variables we
investigated, and quite possibly, the least amenable
to any straightforward syntactic, lexical, or semantic
explanation.

19here are the three questions we asked: how formal

how

do you think is the above sentence?
much information do you think the above
sentence carries?
the above sentence implies/suggests, or
leaves to possible interpretations? we also
had optional comment boxes so that turkers can leave us their
thoughts on the annotation process.

how much do you think

we further compared our mean formality ratings
from mechanical turk to the mean formality ratings
reported by lahiri and lu (2011) in their    actual   
annotation phase. results are shown in table 2.
note that the mean turker ratings are highly posi-
tively correlated with the mean ratings from lahiri
and lu   s quality-controlled study     except the news
genre, where correlations are weaker (also see ta-
ble 1). we plan to investigate the news genre in
future work. but the overall patterns are strongly
encouraging, and validate the idea that a formality-
annotated corpus can indeed be built reliably with
likert-scale-style annotations.

we show some example high- and low- formal-
ity, informativeness and implicature sentences in ta-
ble 3.20 note that they follow the usual intuitions
about formality, informativeness, and implicature
quite well; for example, sentences that are high in
formality and informativeness, but low in implica-
ture, are longer and more dif   cult to read. the op-
posite is also true; informal and uninformative sen-
tences are much shorter, and are often laden with
a lot of implicature.21 for the rest of the paper,

20the

full

dataset

is

available

at

https://drive.google.com/file/d/
0b2mzhc7popbgdxzmrlg2rudqdda/view?usp=
sharing. examples in table 3 are from our second mturk
experiment, which comprises better-quali   ed turkers.

21interesting trivia: the title of this paper derives from a sen-
tence in our corpus that is very low in formality and informa-

figure 1: genre-wise variation of formality, informativeness, and implicature (can be viewed in grayscale).

we only consider the mean ratings from our second
mturk experiment, which comprises better-quali   ed
turkers. for notational convenience, mean ratings
will henceforth be referred to as formality, infor-
mativeness and implicature, as appropriate.

4 experiments

we performed three separate experiments on the
7,032 annotated sentences to identify different as-
pects of the annotations. in our    rst experiment, we
explored how sentence-level formality, implicature,
and informativeness vary across three different on-
line genres     news, blog, and forums (section 4.1).
in the second experiment, we investigated the cor-
relation among these three variables, and correla-
tion with stylistic scores (section 4.2). finally, in
section 4.3, we examined how documents varied in
terms of sentential formality, informativeness, and
implicature     on average.

4.1 genre-wise variation
we plot    ve-bin histograms of formality, informa-
tiveness, and implicature in figure 1. note from fig-
ure 1 that overall, our corpus is dominated by high-
informativeness, mid-to-high-formality, and mid-
implicature sentences. since our implicature rating
is less reliable than the other two ratings (cf. sec-
tion 3.2), it is relatively unclear whether this mid-
implicature trend is a real phenomenon, or is more
of a re   ection of central tendency bias among the
annotators     who, lacking a better choice and a bet-
ter interpretation     chose middling values for the im-
plicature rating. central tendency in implicature is

tiveness, and medium in implicature.

also observed for the three individual genres     news,
blog, forums.

and

the news genre

is dominated by high-
mid-to-high-formality
informativeness,
sentences; blogs,
too, are mostly high-formality
and mid-to-high-informativeness sentences; on the
other hand, forums are dominated by mid-to-low-
formality sentences, and are spread out almost
evenly when it comes to informativeness. the
general trends corroborate earlier studies (lahiri et
al., 2011; lahiri and lu, 2011).

the fact that forums are spread out in terms of
(sentential) informativeness shows that there are all
kinds of sentences in forums     some are very infor-
mative, some are somewhat informative, and some
are uninformative (e.g., help-eliciting setences such
as    help please!   , sentences expressing gratitude
such as    thanks everybody!   , and suggestive sen-
tences such as    give it a shot.   ). filtering forum sen-
tences by informativeness may be a useful    rst step
towards effective mining of forum data.

4.2 relationship with others
we experimented with eight different sentential
stylistic variables, as detailed below:

1. fo: formality of the sentence, i.e., the mean
formality rating assigned by turkers in our sec-
ond mturk experiment.

2. in: informativeness of the sentence, i.e., the
mean informativeness rating assigned by turk-
ers in our second mturk experiment.

3. im: implicature of the sentence, i.e., the mean
implicature rating assigned by turkers in our
second mturk experiment.

fo
1.00

in
0.73
1.00

im
0.07
0.05
1.00

fo
1.00

in
0.63
1.00

im
-0.08
-0.10
1.00

fo
in
im
lw
lc
f
i
ld

fo
in
im
lw
lc
f
i
ld

lw
0.55
0.62
0.10
1.00

overall
lc
0.59
0.65
0.10
0.98
1.00

lw
0.34
0.43
-0.01
1.00

news
lc
0.38
0.45
-0.02
0.98
1.00

f
0.34
0.31
-0.06
0.23
0.28
1.00

f
0.27
0.28
-0.12
0.21
0.27
1.00

i

0.03*
0.05
0.03**
0.12
0.07
-0.14
1.00

i

-0.01
-0.01
0.02
0.08
0.03
-0.15
1.00

ld
0.01
-0.02
0.00
-0.18
-0.08
0.04*
-0.02
1.00

ld
0.00
-0.02
0.00
-0.17
-0.08
-0.03
0.05*
1.00

fo
1.00

in
0.73
1.00

im
-0.10
-0.08*
1.00

fo
1.00

in
0.57
1.00

im
0.04
0.08
1.00

lw
0.51
0.62
0.02
1.00

blog
lc
0.54
0.65
0.01
0.98
1.00

lw
0.42
0.58
0.06*
1.00

forum
lc
0.43
0.60
0.05*
0.97
1.00

f
0.33
0.29
-0.18
0.18
0.23
1.00

f

0.07*
0.09
-0.08*
0.02
0.06*
1.00

i

0.07*
0.06**
0.04
0.13
0.08*
-0.12
1.00

i

0.16
0.16
0.05**
0.23
0.19
-0.12
1.00

ld
-0.04
-0.06*
-0.02
-0.23
-0.15
0.06*
-0.06**

1.00

ld
-0.07*
-0.08*
-0.02
-0.26
-0.15
0.01
-0.03
1.00

table 4: spearman   s    between stylistic variables, as explained in text. most of the results are statistically
signi   cantly different from zero, with p-value < 0.0001. for the results marked with a *, p-values are <
0.01; for those marked with a **, p-values are < 0.05. results in italics are statistically insigni   cant.

figure 2: sentential make-up of formality, informativeness, and implicature (can be viewed in grayscale).

4. lw: length of the sentence in words.

5. lc: length of the sentence in characters.

6. f: formality score of the sentence, as proposed

by heylighen and dewaele (1999).

7. i: informativeness score of the sentence.

8. ld: lexical density of the sentence (ure,

1971).

among these variables, heylighen and dewaele   s

formality score is given by:

f = (noun frequency + adjective freq. + preposi-
tion freq. + article freq. - pronoun freq. - verb freq.
- adverb freq. - interjection freq. + 100)/2

where the frequencies are taken as percentages
with respect to the total number of words in the sen-
tence. the inspiration for this score comes from the
fact that nouns, adjectives, prepositions, and articles
are found to be non-deictic in word correlation stud-
ies, whereas pronouns, verbs, adverbs, and interjec-
tions are found to be deictic.22 f-score measures for-
mality as the amount of relative non-deixis present
in a sentence (cf. section 2.1).

ure   s lexical density takes the form:
ld = (nlex/n)    100
where nlex is the number of lexical tokens (nouns,
adjectives, verbs, adverbs) in the sentence, and n is
the total number of words in the sentence.

the informativeness score (i) is a scoring formula
we propose in this paper. the idea is as follows.
recall from section 1 that contextuality     the op-
posite of deep formality     is affected by both deixis
as well as implicature. although implicature is very
hard to quantify, a measure of    ambiguity    in a given
piece of text can be formulated by counting how
many id138 senses (miller, 1995) the words in
that text carry on average. the more senses words
have, the more ambiguous the text is. the informa-
tiveness score (i) of a sentence is thus given by the
average number of id138 senses per word in the
sentence.23

correlations between the eight variables are given
in table 4. note from table 4 that formality and

22conjunctions are deixis-neutral. we used crftagger

(phan, 2006) to part-of-speech-tag our sentences.

23more accurately, it should be called an ambiguity score.

informativeness are highly correlated in all cases,
thereby validating heylighen and dewaele   s hypoth-
esis that the purpose of formality (deep formality
in particular) is more informative communication.
note, however, that in most cases, there is very
little correlation between formality and implicature
(small positive/negative values). there are two pos-
sible reasons for this: (a) implicature is a poorly-
understood phenomenon, and maybe formality and
implicature are not as antagonistically related as ar-
gued by heylighen and dewaele; (b) our implicature
annotation by turkers showed a central tendency
bias and poor agreement between two mturk ex-
periments, so maybe the mean implicature ratings
we obtained are not truly re   ective of the actual
amount of implicature present in a sentence. val-
idating which of these two (or maybe both) is the
correct reason, is a part of our future work.

note further from table 4 that formality and in-
formativeness are positively correlated (moderate-
to-good correlation) with length of the sentence    
in words and characters. this corroborates the ear-
lier    nding by lahiri et al. (2011) that as a piece
of text gets more formal, it tends to become longer
and more intricate. formality and informativeness
also correlate positively (moderate correlation) with
heylighen and dewaele   s f-score, except in the fo-
rum genre. on the other hand, they do not have
signi   cant correlations with the informativeness (i)
score except the forum genre.
implicature has a
signi   cant, but small negative correlation with f-
score in all cases. lexical density negatively corre-
lates with length of the sentence (#words and #char-
acters). informativeness score correlates positively
with length, but negatively with heylighen and de-
waele   s f-score, as expected. implicature also cor-
relates negatively with f-score in all cases. the two
length scores have an almost perfect positive corre-
lation among them, which is unsurprising.

the surprising part, however, is that formality
and informativeness (as rated by humans) are not
very highly correlated (either positively or nega-
tively) with heylighen and dewaele   s f-score or
our informativeness (i) score. maybe these two
scores are measuring complementary aspects of the
phenomenon of formality, and are not individually
able to explain all the variations. automated scor-
ing/prediction of formality by modeling it on top of

scores like these (perhaps as features) is our future
plan. we would also like to investigate how to pre-
dict informativeness, and how to get a better handle
on implicature scoring     both by humans as well as
automated.

4.3 sentential make-up of documents
in our    nal experiment, we investigated how the sen-
tences in a document vary in terms of formality, im-
plicature, and informativeness     starting from the
beginning sentences, then the middle ones, and    -
nally the last ones. we divided the sentences into
ten successive bins (deciles) based on their position
in the document, and measured the mean formality,
informativeness, and implicature per decile. the re-
sults     averaged across all documents in a particular
genre (blog, forums, news, overall)     are shown in
figure 2. figure 2 also shows the standard errors for
each decile.

note from figure 2 that news sentences are most
formal and most informative, followed by blog sen-
tences, followed by forum sentences.
in terms
of formality and informativeness trends, news sen-
tences start with high formality and informativeness,
then gradually diminish in both     perhaps re   ect-
ing the fact that in journalistic writing,    rst few sen-
tences carry the most information (to catch the read-
ers    attention), and the information/interesting-ness
content decreases substantially thereafter. forum
sentences, on the other hand, maintain a low level
of formality and informativeness throughout     with
a few small peaks and valleys in-between. for blogs,
the trend is    rst decreasing, then increasing, and
then decreasing again     indicating that the most in-
formative (and formal) sentences in blogs may be in
the middle. all three genres taken together, both for-
mality and informativeness show a decreasing trend.
there is no clear trend in the implicature rating of
sentences     it is mostly an assortment of peaks and
valleys.

that ties together all three pragmatic variables at the
sentence level. we measured reliability of our an-
notations by running two independent rounds of an-
notation on mturk, and inspecting the correlation
among mean ratings between the two rounds. we
further examined correlation of our annotations with
pilot sentence formality annotations done in a more
controlled setting (lahiri and lu, 2011).
it was
observed that while formality and informativeness
can be reliably annotated on a 1-7 scale, implica-
ture poses a much more dif   cult challenge. we ana-
lyzed the distribution of formality, informativeness,
and implicature across three genres (news, blogs,
and forums), and found signi   cant differences    
both in terms of overall distribution, and also in
terms of the documents    sentential make-up. cor-
relations between the human ratings and    ve other
stylistic variables were carefully examined. our fu-
ture plans include an automatic sentence-level for-
mality and informativeness predictor, in the same
spirit as (danescu-niculescu-mizil et al., 2013). we
also plan to investigate implicature rating more thor-
oughly, and    gure out a good way to improve relia-
bility in implicature annotation.

the limitations of our study mostly stem from our
lack of control on the mturk experiments. some
of that is intentional, because we really wanted
to observe what people think/feel as formal, infor-
mative, and implicative. however, previous stud-
ies have employed measures like background ques-
tionnaires, linguistic attentiveness surveys, and z-
scoring to weed out/smooth dif   culties (danescu-
niculescu-mizil et al., 2013). while these are in-
deed promising research directions to try, we opine
that even without such stringent measures, we were
able to obtain quite good annotations     except impli-
cature, where the earlier approach of degen (2015)
may truly be very helpful.

acknowledgments

5 conclusion

in this paper, we introduced a dataset of 7,032 sen-
tences rated for formality, informativeness, and im-
plicature on a 1-7 scale by human annotators on
amazon mechanical turk. to the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the    rst large-scale annotation effort

we gratefully acknowledge rada mihalcea for her
support; mturk annotators for their annotations; ed-
uard hovy and julian brooke for valuable discus-
sions; haiying li and nina dethlefs for inspiration
and dataset; francis heylighen and jean-marc de-
waele for their kindness and brilliant ideas, includ-
ing the i-score; and lastly but most importantly, xi-

aofei lu for his continuous encouragement, warm
intellectual companionship, excellent advice and ca-
maraderie, sound ideas in the early stages of the
study, and great help with thought processing. this
work would not have been possible without you. all
results, discussions, and comments contained herein
are the sole responsibility of the author, and in no
way associated with any of the above-mentioned
people. the errors and omissions, if any, should be
addressed to the author, and will be thankfully re-
ceived.

references
fadi abu sheikha and diana inkpen. 2011. generation
in proceedings
of formal and informal sentences.
of the 13th european workshop on natural language
generation, pages 187   193, nancy, france, septem-
ber. association for computational linguistics.

fadi abu sheikha and diana inkpen. 2012. learning to
classify documents according to formal and infor-
mal style. submitted to linguistic issues in language
technology (lilt).

luciana benotti and patrick blackburn. 2011. classical
planning and causal implicatures.
in michael beigl,
henning christiansen, thomas r. roth-berghofer,
anders kofod-petersen, kenny r. coventry, and
hedda r. schmidtke, editors, modeling and using
context, volume 6967 of lecture notes in computer
science, pages 26   39. springer berlin heidelberg.

luciana benotti. 2010.

implicature as an interactive
process. ph.d. thesis, universit  e henri poincar  e -
nancy i, january.

douglas biber. 1988. variation across speech and writ-

ing. cambridge university press.

julian brooke and graeme hirst. 2013. hybrid models
for lexical acquisition of correlated styles. in pro-
ceedings of the sixth international joint conference on
natural language processing, pages 82   90, nagoya,
japan, october. asian federation of natural language
processing.

julian brooke and graeme hirst.

2014. supervised
ranking of co-occurrence pro   les for acquisition of
in proceedings of
continuous lexical attributes.
coling 2014, the 25th international conference on
computational linguistics: technical papers, pages
2172   2183, dublin, ireland, august. dublin city uni-
versity and association for computational linguistics.
julian brooke, tong wang, and graeme hirst. 2010. au-
tomatic acquisition of lexical formality. in proceed-
ings of the 23rd international conference on compu-
tational linguistics: posters, coling    10, pages 90   

98, stroudsburg, pa, usa. association for computa-
tional linguistics.

robyn carston.

1998.

informativeness, relevance,
and scalar implicature.
in robyn carston and seiji
uchida, editors, relevance theory: applications and
implications, pages 179   236. john benjamins pub-
lishing co., amsterdam.

cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil, moritz sudhof, dan
jurafsky, jure leskovec, and christopher potts. 2013.
a computational approach to politeness with applica-
tion to social factors. in acl (1), pages 250   259. the
association for computer linguistics.

cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil.

2012. a compu-
tational approach to linguistic style coordination.
ph.d. thesis, cornell university.

judith degen. 2015.

investigating the distribution of
some (but not all) implicatures using corpora and web-
based methods. semantics and pragmatics (in press).
nina dethlefs, heriberto cuay  ahuitl, helen hastie, ver-
ena rieser, and oliver lemon. 2014. cluster-based
prediction of user ratings for stylistic surface re-
in proceedings of the 14th conference of
alisation.
the european chapter of the association for computa-
tional linguistics, pages 702   711, gothenburg, swe-
den, april. association for computational linguistics.
arthur c. graesser, danielle s. mcnamara, max m.
louwerse, and zhiqiang cai.
2004. coh-metrix:
analysis of text on cohesion and language. behav-
ior research methods, instruments, & computers,
36(2):193   202.

herbert paul grice. 1975. logic and conversation. in
peter cole and jerry l. morgan, editors, syntax and
semantics: vol. 3: speech acts, pages 41   58. aca-
demic press, new york.

robert m. harnish. 1976. logical form and implicature.
in thomas g. bever, jerrold j. katz, and d. terence
langendoen, editors, an integrated theory of linguis-
tic ability, pages 313   392. thomas y. crowell, new
york.

francis heylighen and jean-marc dewaele. 1999. for-
mality of language: de   nition, measurement and be-
havioral determinants. technical report, center    leo
apostel   , free university of brussels.

eduard h. hovy. 1990. pragmatics and natural lan-
guage generation. arti   cial intelligence, 43(2):153   
197, may.

richard hudson. 1994. about 37% of word-tokens are

nouns. language, 70(2):pp. 331   339.

kirill kireyev.

2009. semantic-based estimation of
term informativeness. in proceedings of human lan-
guage technologies: the 2009 annual conference of
the north american chapter of the association for
computational linguistics, pages 530   538, boulder,

heusinger, and paul portner, editors, semantics: an
international handbook of natural language mean-
ing, volume 3, pages 2516   2536. mouton de gruyter,
berlin. this article was written in 2008.

martin rajman and tony hartley. 2001. automatically
predicting mt systems rankings compatible with flu-
ency, adequacy or informativeness scores. in procs.
4th isle workshop on mt evaluation, mt summit
viii, pages 29   34.

jason d. m. rennie and tommi jaakkola. 2005. using
term informativeness for named entity detection. in
proceedings of the 28th annual international acm si-
gir conference on research and development in in-
formation retrieval, sigir    05, pages 353   360, new
york, ny, usa. acm.

laura teddiman. 2009. contextuality and beyond: in-
vestigating an online diary corpus.
in eytan adar,
matthew hurst, tim finin, natalie s. glance, nico-
las nicolov, and belle l. tseng, editors, icwsm. the
aaai press.

mika timonen, timo toivanen, yue teng, chao cheng,
and liang he. 2012. informativeness-based keyword
extraction from short documents. in ana l. n. fred,
joaquim filipe, ana l. n. fred, and joaquim filipe,
editors, kdir, pages 411   421. scitepress.

jean ure. 1971. lexical density and register differentia-

tion. applications of linguistics, pages 443   452.

zhaohui wu and clyde lee giles. 2013. measuring
in proceedings of
term informativeness in context.
the 2013 conference of the north american chap-
ter of the association for computational linguistics:
human language technologies, pages 259   269, at-
lanta, georgia, june. association for computational
linguistics.

colorado, june. association for computational lin-
guistics.

shibamouli lahiri and xiaofei lu.

2011.
rater agreement on sentence formality.
abs/1109.0069.

inter-
corr,

shibamouli lahiri, prasenjit mitra, and xiaofei lu.
2011.
informality judgment at sentence level and
experiments with formality score. in proceedings of
the 12th international conference on computational
linguistics and intelligent text processing - volume
part ii, cicling   11, pages 446   457, berlin, heidel-
berg. springer-verlag.

helen leckie-tarry and david birch. 1995. language
and context: a functional linguistic theory of reg-
ister. pinter publishers.

william j. m. levelt. 1989. speaking: from intention to

articulation. mit press, cambridge, ma.

nancy s. levin and ellen f. prince. 1986. gapping and
causal implicature. paper in linguistics, 19(3):351   
364.

haiying li, zhiqiang cai, and arthur c. graesser. 2013.
comparing two measures for formality. in proceed-
ings of the florida arti   cial intelligence research so-
ciety conference.

rensis likert. 1932. a technique for the measurement

of attitudes. archives of psychology, 22(140):1   55.

i   geneia machili. 2014. writing in the workplace: vari-
ation in the writing practices and formality of eight
multinational companies in greece. ph.d. thesis,
university of the west of england.

george armitage miller. 1995. id138: a lexical
database for english. commun. acm, 38(11):39   41,
november.

scott nowson, jon oberlander, and alastair j. gill. 2005.
weblogs, genres, and individual differences. in pro-
ceedings of the 27th annual conference of the cogni-
tive science society, pages 1666   1671.

anna papafragou and julien musolino. 2003. scalar
implicatures: experiments at the semantics-pragmatics
interface. cognition, 86(3):253     282.

kelly peterson, matt hohensee, and fei xia.

2011.
email formality in the workplace: a case study on
the enron corpus. in proceedings of the workshop on
languages in social media, lsm    11, pages 86   95,
stroudsburg, pa, usa. association for computational
linguistics.

xuan-hieu phan. 2006. crftagger: crf english pos

tagger.

christopher potts. 2005. the logic of conventional im-
plicatures. oxford studies in theoretical linguistics.
oxford university press, oxford.

christopher potts. 2012. conventional implicature and
expressive content. in claudia maienborn, klaus von

