unveiling the political agenda of the european parliament

plenary: a topical analysis

derek greene

school of computer science & informatics

university college dublin, ireland

derek.greene@ucd.ie

james p. cross

school of politics & international relations

university college dublin, ireland

james.cross@ucd.ie

5
1
0
2

 
l
u
j
 

7

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

4
v
2
0
3
7
0

.

5
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract
this study analyzes political interactions in the european parlia-
ment (ep) by considering how the political agenda of the plenary
sessions has evolved over time and the manner in which members
of the european parliament (meps) have reacted to external and
internal stimuli when making parliamentary speeches. it does so
by considering the context in which speeches are made, and the
content of those speeches. to detect latent themes in legislative
speeches over time, speech content is analyzed using a new dy-
namic id96 method, based on two layers of matrix factor-
ization. this method is applied to a new corpus of all english lan-
guage legislative speeches in the ep plenary from the period 1999-
2014. our    ndings suggest that the political agenda of the ep has
evolved signi   cantly over time, is impacted upon by the committee
structure of the parliament, and reacts to exogenous events such as
eu treaty referenda and the emergence of the euro-crisis have a
signi   cant impact on what is being discussed in parliament.

introduction

1.
the plenary sessions of the european parliament (ep) are one of
the most important arenas in which european representatives can
air questions, express criticisms and take policy positions to in   u-
ence eu politics. indeed the plenary of the parliament represents
the closest that the european union (eu) gets to engaging in the
core democratic process of publicly-aired democratic debate. as
a result, understanding how members of the european parliament
(meps) express themselves in plenary, and investigating how the
political discussions evolve and respond to internal and external
stimuli is a fundamentally important undertaking.

in recent years, there has been a concurrent explosion of online
records detailing the content of mep speeches, and the develop-
ment of data mining techniques capable of extracting latent patterns
in content across sets of these speeches. this allows us for the    rst
time to investigate the plenary agenda of the parliament in a holistic
and rigorous manner. one approach to tracking the political atten-
tion of political    gures has been to apply id96 algorithms
to large corpora of political texts, such as parliamentary speeches
of the u.s. senate [18]. these algorithms seek to distill the la-
tent thematic patterns in a corpus of speeches [3], and can be used
to improve the transparency of the political process by providing
a macro-level overview of the activities and agendas of politicians
in a time- and resource-ef   cient manner. this type of overview
would otherwise be unavailable due to the time and resource costs
associated with manually hand-coding such a large-scale corpus.

modeling method1 to investigate how the plenary agenda of the ep
has changed over three parliamentary terms (1999   2014), based
on the analysis of a corpus of 210,247 speeches from 1,735 meps
across the 28 eu member states. the method described in sec-
tion 3 involves applying two layers of non-negative matrix factor-
ization (nmf) id96 [12]. firstly, the corpus of speeches
is divided into distinct segments or time windows, on which low-
level window topics are identi   ed by applying nmf. secondly, the
topics from each window are represented as a combined matrix of
   topic documents   . by applying nmf to this new representation,
we can identify high-level dynamic topics which potentially span
many time windows. this process allows us to explore parliamen-
tary activity both at a granular level and over multiple parliamen-
tary terms. in addition, we can relate these dynamic topics to the
original speakers, allowing us to identify the topics to which indi-
vidual meps are paying most attention.

applying our proposed id96 methodology reveals the
breadth of policy areas covered by the ep, and the results presented
later in section 5 indicate that the political agenda of the parliament
has evolved signi   cantly across the three parliamentary terms con-
sidered here. by examining a number of topic case studies, ranging
from the euro-crisis to eu treaty changes, we can identify the re-
lationship between the evolution of these dynamic topics and the
exogenous events driving them. by using external data sources, we
can also con   rm the semantic and construct validity of these top-
ics. in order to explain some of the patterns in speech making we
observe, we conclude the paper with an exploration of the deter-
minants of mep speech-making behavior on the topics detected by
our topic model. to provide access to the results of the project to
interested parties, we make a browsable version available online2.
this website provides a greater level of transparency into the activ-
ities of the ep as a functioning democratic institution.

2. related work
2.1 european parliament
the most prominent forms of mep behavior that have been ex-
amined in the existing literature include the expression of policy
positions through speeches and written submissions, and voting in
plenary. the formal committee structure of the parliament pro-
vides strategic advantages to certain meps by providing commit-
tee members with privileged access to information, and opportunity
to shape the parliament   s negotiation stance. this has led meps to
self-select into committees dealing with issues that they    nd salient
in order to affect outcomes in those policy areas [5, 26].

this paper takes up the challenge of extracting latent thematic pat-
terns in political speeches by developing a suitable dynamic topic

1https://github.com/derekgreene/dynamic-nmf
2http://erdos.ucd.ie/europarl

committee chairs hold important administrative powers to set the
committee agenda and the topics for debate at committee meet-
ings. rapporteurs are tasked with preparing reports about commit-
tee activities, and represent a medium for disseminating informa-
tion about committee activities to the broader plenary [1]. rappor-
teurs thus plays a central role in shaping the image of committee
activities available to committee outsiders. outside of committees,
strict institutional rules also govern the allocation of speaking time
during the parliament   s plenary sessions, and structure the ability of
meps to intercede during negotiations [10, 16]. the total amount
of speaking time for any particular issue is limited and divided be-
tween time reserved for actors with formal duties in plenary such as
rapporteurs, and time proportionally divided between party groups
based upon their overall share of meps elected. limits on speaking
time can lead to competition between meps, and party group lead-
ers allocate the scare resource of speaking time between competing
demands from rank and    le meps for maximum impact.

due to the limits in the total amount of speaking time available,
meps can also submit written questions and statements that are ap-
pended to the plenary records. these provide extra opportunity for
meps to state their positions outside the time limits imposed on
oral questioning during plenary debates. these written questions
have been found to be the most popular avenue used by meps to
interact with the commission directly [19], and provide the oppor-
tunity for       re-alarm oversight    of national governments guilty of
implementation failures of eu law [11]. meps enjoy more discre-
tion over their ability to submit written submissions than they do
over oral speaking time.

in terms of the content of legislative speeches in the parliament, it
has been shown that speeches re   ect latent ideological con   ict be-
tween meps, with both left-right and pro-/anti-eu integration di-
mensions of con   ict having been detected [22]. using text analysis
techniques based upon word-frequency distributions, these authors
were able to demonstrate the correspondence between the content
of legislative speeches and other measures of ideological positions
found in the literature based upon roll-call votes and expert surveys.

2.2 topic models
in the    eld of data analytics advanced id96 algorithms
that go beyond word-frequency distributions have recently been
applied to large-scale text collections. considerable research on
id96 has focused on the use of probabilistic methods
such as variants of id44 (lda) [23]. authors
have subsequently developed analogous probabilistic approaches
for tracking the evolution of topics over time in a sequentially-
organized corpus of documents, such as the dynamic topic model
(dtm) of blei and lafferty [2]. alternative algorithms, such as
non-negative id105 (nmf) [12], have also been ef-
fective in discovering the underlying topics in text corpora [15, 25].
saha & sindhwani [20] proposed an online learning framework for
employing nmf to extract topics from streaming social media con-
tent, by dividing the streams into short sliding time windows so as
discover topics that are smoothly evolving over time.

as well as analyzing temporal data, recent work in this area has fo-
cused on important practical issues, including automating param-
eter selection (e.g. how many topics are appropriate for our cor-
pus?) and assessing topic coherence (i.e. how meaningful are the
topics generated by our algorithm?) [7, 15]. the latter corresponds
closely to the concept of semantic validity introduced in [18] for as-
sessing the reliability of topics found in text corpora. this concept

covers both intra-topic validity (the extent to which a single topic is
meaningful) and inter-topic validity (the extent to which different
topics are related to one another in a meaningful way).

2.3 topic models applied to political texts
some id96 methods have been adopted in the political
science literature to analyze political attention. in settings where
politicians have limited time-resources to express their views, such
as the plenary sessions in parliaments, politicians must decide what
topics to address. analyzing such speeches can thus provide insight
into the political priorities of the politician under consideration.
single membership topic models, that assume each speech relates
to one topic, have successfully been applied to plenary speeches
made in the 105th to the 108th u.s. senate in order to trace politi-
cal attention of the senators within this context over time [18]. this
study found that a rich and meaningful political agenda emerged
from the collected speeches, where topics evolved signi   cantly over
time in response to both internal and external stimuli.

bayesian hierarchical topic models have also been used to capture
the political priorities of members of congress as found in their
of   cial press releases [9]. this study shows that the press releases
are also responsive to external stimuli such as upcoming votes in
congress or events external to congress such as the anniversary
of september 11th. press release topics are also geographically
structured with members of congress from rural farming commu-
nities more likely to pay attention to agricultural issues than those
from urban communities for instance. the introduction of these
methods to the study of political attention has allowed researchers
to consider larger and more complete datasets of political activity
across longer time periods than has previously been possible. the
results unveil latent patterns in political attention that are dif   cult
and time-consuming to capture using more traditional methodolog-
ical approaches, such as expert surveys and hand-coding of texts.
applying them to study the political agenda of the european par-
liament is the aim of this paper.

3. methods
in this section we describe a two-layer strategy for applying topic
modeling in a non-negative id105 framework to a
timestamped corpus of political speeches. firstly, in section 3.1
we describe the application of nmf id96 to a single set
of speeches from a    xed time period. secondly, in section 3.2 we
propose a new approach for combining the outputs of topic model-
ing from successive time periods to detect a set of dynamic topics
that span part or all of the duration of the corpus.

3.1 id96 speeches
while work on topic models often involves the use of lda, nmf
can also be applied to textual data to reveal topical structures [25].
the ability of nmf to apply tf-idf weighting to the data prior
to id96 has shown to be advantageous in producing di-
verse but semantically coherent topics which are less likely to be
represented by the same high frequency terms. this makes nmf
suitable when the task is to identify both broad, high-level groups
of documents and niche topics with specialized vocabularies [15].

given a corpus of n speeches, we    rst construct a speech-term fre-
quency matrix a     irn  m, where m is the number unique terms
present across all speeches (i.e. the corpus vocabulary). applying
nmf to a results in a reduced rank-k approximation in the form
of the product of two non-negative factors a     wh, where the

objective is to minimize the reconstruction error between a and
wh. the rows of the factor h     irk  m can be interpreted as k
topics, de   ned by non-negative weights for each of the m terms in
the corpus vocabulary. ordering each row provides a topic descrip-
tor, in the form of a ranking of the terms relative to corresponding
topic. the columns in the matrix w     irn  k provide membership
weights for all n speeches with respect to the k topics.

in our experiments we use the fast alternating least squares variant
of nmf introduced in [13]. nmf algorithms are often initialized
with random factors. however, this can lead to unstable results,
where the algorithm converges to a variety of different local minima
of poor quality, depending on the random initialization. to ensure
a deterministic output and to improve the quality of the resulting
topics, we generate initial factors using the non-negative double
singular value decomposition (nndsvd) approach [4].

a key parameter selection decision in id96 pertains to the
number of topics k. choosing too few topics will produce results
that are overly broad, while choosing too many will lead to many
small, highly-similar topics. one general strategy proposed in the
literature has been to compare the topic coherence of topic models
generated for different values of k [7]. a range of such coherence
measures exist in the literature, although many of these are speci   c
to lda. recently, o   callaghan et al. [15] proposed a general mea-
sure, tc-w2v, which evaluates the relatedness of a set of top terms
describing a topic, based on the similarity of their representations
in a id97 distributional semantic space [14]. speci   cally, the
coherence of a topic th represented by its t top ranked terms is
given by the mean pairwise cosine similarity between all relevant
term vectors in the id97 space:

coh(th) =

cos(wvi, wvj)

(1)

an overall score for a topic model t consisting of k topics is given
by the mean of the individual topic coherence scores:

coh(t ) =

1
k

coh(th)

(2)

an appropriate value for k can be identi   ed by examining a plot of
the mean tc-w2v coherence scores for a    xed range [kmin, kmax]
and selecting a value corresponding to the maximum coherence.
an example is shown in fig. 1, where the plot of mean coherence
scores suggests a value k = 19 from a candidate range [10, 25].

parliamentary speeches will often be short and concise. in the case
of the ep, speeches are often limited to 1-2 minutes in duration.
as such, we would expect each speech to be primarily related to
a single topic. this is consistent with the observations made by
quinn et al. [18] when analyzing speeches from the u.s. congress.
here we produce a single membership topic model (i.e. a disjoint
id91 of individual speeches in relation to topics) by selecting
the maximum membership weight for each row in the factor w.
3.2 dynamic id96
when applying id91 to temporal data, authors have often pro-
posed dividing the data into time windows of    xed duration [24]. in
the case of streaming data, such as content originating from social
media platforms, this involves arti   cially transforming the continu-
ous streams into sliding windows. however, in the case of political
speeches transcribed from distinct plenary sessions, the data is nat-
urally divided into segments. while some aspects of the agenda

(cid:1) t(cid:88)
1(cid:0)t

j   1(cid:88)

2

j=2

i=1

k(cid:88)

h=1

figure 1: plot of mean tc-w2v topic coherence scores for dif-
ferent values for the number window topics k, generated on a
time window of european parliament speeches from 2005-q1.

will remain common between successive sessions, in other cases
the focus of debates will change considerably between sessions.
consequently, online learning approaches which use sliding win-
dows and assume a smooth evolution in topics over time, such as
proposed in [20], may be unsuitable.

following [24], we divide the full time-stamped corpus of parlia-
mentary speeches into    disjoint time windows {w1, . . . , w  } of
equal length. the rationale for the use of time windows as opposed
to processing the full corpus in batch is two-fold: 1) we are in-
terested in identifying the agenda of the parliament at individual
time points as well as over all time; 2) short-lived topics, appearing
only in a small number of time windows, may be obscured by only
analyzing the corpus in its entirety.

at each time window wi, we apply nmf with parameter selection
based on eqn. 2 to the transcriptions of all speeches delivered dur-
ing that window, yielding a window topic model ti containing ki
window topics. this process produces a set of successive window
topic models {t1, . . . , t  }, which represents the output of the    rst
layer in our proposed methodology.

from the window topic models we construct a new condensed rep-
resentation of the original corpus, by viewing the rows of each
factor hi coming from each window topic model as    topic docu-
ments   . each topic document naturally contains non-negative weights
indicating the descriptive terms for that window topic. we expect
that window topics from different windows which share a common
theme will have similar topic documents. speci   cally, we construct
a condensed topic-term matrix b as follows:

1. start with an empty matrix b.
2. for each window topic model ti:

(a) for each window topic within ti, select the t top ranked
terms from the corresponding row vector of the associ-
ated nmf factor h, set all weights for all other terms in
that vector to 0. add the vector as a new row in b.

3. once vectors from all topic models have been stacked in this
way, remove any columns with only zero values (i.e. terms
from the original corpus which did not ever appear in the t
top ranked terms for any window topics).

the matrix b has size n(cid:48)    m(cid:48), where n(cid:48) =(cid:80)  

i=1 ki is the total
number of    topic documents    and m(cid:48) << m is is the subset of rel-
evant terms remaining after step 3. the use of only the top t terms

0.2900.2950.3000.3050.3100.315 10 15 20 25mean topic coherencenumber of window topics (k)k=19rank

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

2008-q4
energy
climate
emission
package
change
renewable
target
industry
carbon
gas

2009-q1
climate
change
future
emission
integrated
water
policy
target
industrial
global

2009-q4
climate
change
copenhagen
developing
emission
conference
summit
agreement
global
energy

2010-q1
climate
copenhagen
change
summit
emission
international
mexico
conference
global
world

table 1: example of 4 window topics, described by lists of top
10 terms, which have been grouped together in a single dynamic
topic related to climate change.

in each topic document allows us to implicitly incorporate feature
selection into the process. the result is that we include those terms
that were highly-descriptive in each time window, while excluding
those terms that never featured prominently in any window topic.
this reduces the computational cost for the second factorization
procedure described below.

having constructed b, we now apply a second layer of nmf topic
modeling to the matrix to identify k(cid:48) dynamic topics which poten-
tially span multiple time windows. the process is the same as that
outlined previously in section 3.1. here the tc-w2v coherence
measure is used to detect number of dynamic topics k(cid:48). the re-
sulting factors can be interpreted as follows: the top ranked terms
in each row of h provide a description of the dynamic topics; the
values in the columns of w indicate to what extent each window
topic is related to each dynamic topic.

we track the evolution of these topics over time as follows. firstly,
we assign each window topic to the dynamic topic for which it
has the maximum weight, based on the values in each row in the
factor w. we de   ne the temporal frequency of a dynamic topic as
the number of distinct time windows in which that dynamic topic
appears. the set of all speeches related to this dynamic topic across
the entire corpus corresponds to the union of the speeches assigned
to the individual time window topics which are in turn assigned to
the dynamic topic. to summarize, the key outputs of the two-layer
id96 process are as follows:

1. a set of    topic models, one per time window, each containing
ki window topics. these are described using their top t terms
and the set of all associated speeches.

2. a set of k(cid:48) dynamic topics, each with an associated set of win-
dow topics. these are described using their top t terms and set
of all associated speeches.

table 1 shows a partial example of a dynamic topic. we observe
that, for the four window topics, there is a common theme pertain-
ing to climate change. while the variation across the term lists
re   ects the evolution of this dynamic topic over the correspond-
ing time period (2008-q4 to 2010-q1), the considerable number of
terms shared between the lists underlines its semantic validity.

4. data
during august 2014 we retrieved all plenary speeches available on
europarl, the of   cial website of the european parliament3, corre-
sponding to parliamentary activities of meps during the 5th     7th
terms of the ep. this resulted in 269,696 unique speeches in 24 lan-
3http://europarl.europa.eu

guages. while we considered the use of either multi-lingual topic
modeling or automated translation of documents, issues with the
accuracy and reliability of both strategies lead us to focus on en-
glish language speeches in plenary     either from native speakers or
translated     which make up the majority of the speeches available
on europarl. a corpus of 210,247 english language speeches was
identi   ed in total, representing 77.95% of the original collection. in
terms of coverage of speeches from meps from the member states,
this ranged from 100% for the united kingdom, through 87% for
germany, down to 66.2% for romania. however, the most recent
state to accede to the eu, croatia, represents an outlier in the sense
that only 2.6% of speeches were available in english at the time of
retrieval due to ep speech translation issues.

we subsequently divided the corpus into 60 quarterly time win-
dows, from 1999-q3 to 2014-q2. we selected a quarter as the
time window duration to allow for the identi   cation of granular
topics, while also ensuring there there existed a suf   cient number
of speeches in each time window to perform meaningful topic mod-
eling. in particular, we wished to avoid empty time windows oc-
curring due to the summer recess of the ep. for each time window
wi we construct a speech-term matrix ai as follows:

1. select all speech transcriptions from window wi, and remove

all header and footer lines.

2. find all unigram tokens in each speech, through standard case

conversion, id121, and lemmitization.

3. remove short tokens with < 3 characters, and tokens corre-

sponding to generic stop words (e.g.    are   ,    the   ), parliamentary-
speci   c stop words (e.g.    adjourn   ,    comment   ) and names of
politicians as listed on the ep website.

4. remove tokens occurring in < 5 speeches.
5. construct at, based on the remaining tokens. apply standard
tf-idf term weighting and document length id172.

the resulting time window data sets range in size from 679 speeches
in 2004-q3 to 9,151 speeches in 2011-q4, with an average of 4,811
terms per data set.
5. experimental results
5.1 experimental setup
after pre-processing the data, to identify window topics we ap-
plied nmf with parameter selection as described in section 3.1.
given the relatively specialized vocabulary used in ep debates,
when building the id97 space for parameter selection, as our
background corpus we used the complete set of english language
speeches. we used the same id97 settings and number of top
terms per topic (t = 10) as described in [15]. at each time win-
dow, we generated models containing k     [10, 25] window topics,
selecting the value k that maximized mean tc-w2v coherence.
the resulting median number of topics per window was 15.5. the
illustration of the number of topics per window in fig. 2 shows that
there is considerable variation in the number of topics detected for
each window, which does not correlate with the number of speeches
per quarter (pearson correlation 0.006).

the process above yielded 1,017 window topics across the 60 time
window. we subsequently applied dynamic id96 as de-
scribed in section 3.2. for the number of terms t representing each
window topic, we experimented with values from 10 to the entire
number of terms present in a time window. however, values t > 20
did not result in signi   cantly different dynamic topics. therefore,

figure 2: number of window topics identi   ed per time window,
from 1999-q3 (#1) to 2014-q2 (#60).

figure 4: distribution of tc-w2v topic coherence values for
57 dynamic topics, based on top 10 terms.

figure 3: plot of mean tc-w2v topic coherence scores for dif-
ferent values for the number dynamic topics of k(cid:48), across a can-
didate range [25, 90].

figure 5: recall plot for ep taxonomy subjects relative to dy-
namic topics, for increasing thresholds for cosine similarity.

to minimize the dimensionality of the data, we selected t = 20.
this yielded a matrix of 1,017 window topics represented by 2,710
distinct terms. we applied parameter selection based on tc-w2v
coherence to select an overall number of dynamic topics k(cid:48) from
a range k(cid:48)     [25, 90]. the resulting plot (see fig. 3) indicated a
maximal value at k(cid:48) = 57, although a number of close peaks exist
in the range [62,80]. this corresponds to our manual inspections of
the results, where the topic models for these values of k    appeared
to be highly similar, with minor variations corresponding to merges
or splits of strongly-related topics.

5.2 dynamic topic validation
the 57 topics identi   ed in our experiments are diverse, both in
terms of their thematic content and temporal signatures. table 2
lists the top 20 dynamic topics in the data, ranked with respect to
their tc-w2v topic coherence scores. we report the temporal fre-
quency of the topics, together with a manually-assigned short label
for discussion purposes4. the frequency of dynamic topics ranged
from 11 which appeared in < 10 time windows, to a broad    plenary
administration    topic which appeared in 57 out of 60 windows.

in general, we observed two distinct categories of dynamic top-
ics. the    rst re   ects the day-to-day politics of eu in terms of leg-
islating and debating issues related to the core eu competencies
(e.g.    energy   ,    agriculture   ), while the other re   ects unanticipated
exogenous shocks and meps reactions to these events (e.g. euro-

4full details of all window topics and dynamic topics are available
at http://erdos.ucd.ie/europarl

crisis, september 11th attacks). these two categories exhibit dif-
fering temporal signatures. for instance, we see a considerable
difference between the broad topic on    sheries policy (fig. 7(a)),
when compared to the two topics arising from the events during the
   nancial crisis and subsequent euro-crisis as shown in figures 7(b)
and 7(c) respectively. this distinction between dynamic topic types
re   ects two different forms of political process in the parliament.

to examine the intra-topic semantic validity of these dynamic top-
ics, fig. 4 illustrates the distribution of tc-w2v coherence values
for all dynamic topics, when evaluated in the id97 space built
from the complete speech corpus. as evidence by the ranking in
table 2, the most coherent topics often correspond to core eu com-
petencies. unsurprisingly, broad administrative topics prove to be
least coherent (e.g.    commission questions   ,    council presidency   ,
   plenary administration   ). overall the mean topic coherence score
of 0.36 is considerably higher than the lower bound for tc-w2v
(-1.0), suggesting a high level of semantic validity across the board.

to assess the inter-topic semantic validity of the results, we ex-
amine the extent to which any meaningful higher-level grouping
exists among the 57 dynamic topics. to do this we apply aver-
age linkage agglomerative id91 to the topics. following the
approach described in [8], we re-cluster the row vectors from the
second-layer nmf factor h using normalized pearson correlation
as a similarity metric. here the vectors correspond the weights of
each dynamic topic with respect to the 2,710 terms noted above.
the dendrogram for the hierarchical id91 is shown in fig. 6.
using the interpretation provided in [18], the lower the height at
which any two topics are connected in the dendrogram, the more

 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 10 20 30 40 50 60number of topics (k)time window (quarter number)0.3450.3500.3550.3600.365 30 40 50 60 70 80 90mean topic coherencenumber of dynamic topics (k   )k0=57dynamic topic 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6           tc-w2v coherencedynamic topic0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.00.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8recallsimilarity thresholdshort label
transport
the balkans
air transport
adjusting to globalisation
energy
education and culture
fisheries
human rights

topic
13
42
33
29
6
39
8
2
45 maritime issues
21
26
56
16
15
35
32
47
11
49
17

healthcare
child protection
road safety
research
turkish accession
tax
trade - wto and aid
product labelling and regulation
trade - trade partnerships
regional funds
cfsp

top 10 terms
transport, railway, rail, passenger, road, network, freight, system, train, infrastructure
kosovo, serbia, balkan, resolution, bosnia, albania, iceland, herzegovina, macedonia, process
air, passenger, transport, aviation, airport, traf   c, airline,    ight, sky, single
fund, globalisation, egf, worker, adjustment, mobilisation, european, redundant, application, eur
energy, gas, renewable, ef   ciency, supply, source, electricity, market, target, project
programme, education, culture, language, cultural, youth, sport, learning, young, training
   shery,    shing,    sh, stock,    sherman,    eet, sea, common, policy, measure
rights, human, fundamental, freedom, democracy, law, charter, resolution, union, violation
port, sea, maritime, safety, ship, accident, oil, vessel, transport, inspection
health, patient, environment, safety, public, care, healthcare, action, disease, mental
child, internet, pornography, sexual, school, exploitation, young, victim, education, crime
road, safety, vehicle, transport, system, driver, accident, motor, noise, ecall
research, programme, innovation, framework, funding, industry, technology, development, cell, institute
turkey, turkish, accession, progress, cyprus, negotiation, union, membership, croatia, macedonia
tax, vat, taxation, rate, system, fraud, states, evasion, car, transaction
trade, wto, world, development, developing, international, negotiation, aid, free, relation
product, medicinal, medicine, tobacco, labelling, safety, consumer, regulation, organic, advertising
agreement, partnership, morocco, trade, negotiation, data, cooperation, association, korea,    shery
policy, region, cohesion, development, regional, strategy, structural, fund, economic, area
security, policy, defence, common, foreign, military, nato, immigration, aspect, european

coh.
0.54
0.50
0.48
0.47
0.47
0.43
0.43
0.43
0.43
0.42
0.42
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.39
0.39
0.39
0.39
0.39

freq.
19
12
10
15
36
21
34
52
10
18
14
12
15
20
11
19
11
18
22
19

table 2: list of top 20 dynamic topics, ranked by their tc-w2v topic coherence. for each dynamic topic, we report a manually-
assigned short label, the top 10 terms, coherence, and frequency (i.e. number of time windows in which it appeared).

figure 6: dendrogram for average linkage hierarchical agglomerative id91 of 57 dynamic topics.

subject
1.10 fundamental rights in the union
4.40 education, vocational training & youth
5.20 monetary union
4.70 regional policy
3.50 research & technological development
3.60 energy policy
6.10 common foreign & security policy
3.20 transport policy in general
4.60 consumers    protection in general
3.70 environmental policy

matched topic: top 10 terms
rights, human, fundamental, freedom, democracy, law, charter, resolution, union, violation
programme, education, culture, language, cultural, youth, sport, learning, young, training
euro, economic, growth, stability, pact, bank, policy, monetary, economy, ecb
policy, region, cohesion, development, regional, strategy, structural, fund, economic, area
research, programme, innovation, framework, funding, industry, technology, development, cell, institute
energy, gas, renewable, ef   ciency, supply, source, electricity, market, target, project
security, policy, defence, common, foreign, military, nato, immigration, aspect, european
transport, railway, rail, passenger, road, network, freight, system, train, infrastructure
product, medicinal, medicine, tobacco, labelling, safety, consumer, regulation, organic, advertising
waste, recycling, directive, packaging, management, environment, electronic, fuel, environmental, radioactive

sim.
0.66
0.63
0.62
0.62
0.57
0.53
0.52
0.51
0.50
0.50

table 3: top 10 legislative procedure subjects with corresponding matching dynamic topics, ranked by cosine similarity of the match.

similar their corresponding term usage patterns in ep sessions. we
observe a number of higher-level groupings of interest, which are
highlighted in fig. 6. these include groups related to transport in
general, energy concerns, interactions with other institutions, ed-
ucation and research, trade relations, and eu enlargement. the
presence of these higher-level associations between topics provide
semantic validity for the results presented, where topics one might
expect to be related are found to be correlated with respect to their
rows in the nmf factor h (i.e. they share similar terms in their

topic descriptors).

to externally quantify the extent to which the identi   ed dynamic
topics correspond to policy areas in which the eu has competen-
cies, and thus provide evidence of construct validity, we compare
the 57 dynamic topics to an existing taxonomy of subjects, which is
used by europarl to classify legislative procedures. the taxonomy
as retrieved from the site has several different levels, ranging from
broad top-level subjects (e.g.    3 community policies   ), to highly-

speci   c low-level subjects (e.g.    3.10.06.05 textile plants, cotton   ).
we compare our results to the second level of the taxonomy, con-
taining 48 subjects (e.g.    3.10 agricultural policy and economies   ,
   3.20 transport policy in general   ). for each subject code, we cre-
ate a    subject document    consisting of the description of the sub-
ject and all lower level subjects within that branch of the taxonomy.
we then identify the most similar dynamic topic by comparing the
top 10 terms for that topic with each subject document, based on
cosine similarity. table 3 shows the best matching subjects and
topics identi   ed using this approach. fig. 5 shows the recall of all
48 subjects, for different threshold levels of cosine similarity. for
instance, at a threshold of 0.25, suitably matching dynamic topics
for 72.9% of subjects are identi   ed. to give a couple of examples,
the topic hand-coded as relating to    tax    from our topic model was
correctly matched with the europarl subject code    2.70 taxation   
broadly de   ned at level-2 of the taxonomy, and    2.70.01 direct
taxation    and    2.70.02 indirect taxation    separately at level-3 of the
taxonomy. when looking at the topic manually labeled as relating
to    drugs   , cosine similarity matches this with the level-2 subject
   4.20 public health   , which has a level-3 sub-category relating to
   4.20.04 pharmaceutical products and industry   . when taken in the
context of the matches shown in table 3, this indicates that our dy-
namic topics provide good coverage of the policy areas that might
be expected to feature during ep debates, and thus increases our
con   dence in the construct validity of the method.

5.3 case studies
in order to further investigate the construct validity of our topics,
we focus on three speci   c examples that demonstrate how our mod-
eling strategy captures variation in mep attention to a topic over
time, and how this attention is impacted upon by external stimuli.

our    rst case study relates to mep attention to the    nancial/euro-
crisis. the temporal distribution of speeches relating to this topic
is illustrated in fig. 7(a). this is an interesting case study, as the
initial    nancial crisis peaked in 2008, and the euro-crisis that fol-
lowed has gone through a number of phases with major events in
2009, 2010 and 2012. as such, these events can be thought of as
exogenous shocks that only garner mep attention after they occur,
and their exogenous nature provides a way to externally validity the
dynamic id96 approach in use here. fig. 7(a) demon-
strates a number of distinct peaks in mep speech making on both
the    nancial crisis topic (in orange) and the euro-crisis topic (in
green). attention to the    nancial crisis starts to rise in 2008-q3
and initially peaks in 2008-q4 (point a in fig. 7(a)). this peak in
activity corresponds to the date when the lehman brothers invest-
ment bank collapsed (15/9/2008). the other peaks in activity in
fig. 7(a) correspond to important events in the euro-crisis. point b
corresponds to the revelations about under-reporting of greek debt
following the greek parliamentary election in october 2010, point
c to the irish bailout in november 2010, and point d to mario
draghi   s statement that the ecb was    ready to do whatever it takes
to preserve the euro" in the july 2012 respectively.

our second case study relates to the process of eu treaty reform.
this topic is of interest, because one would expect a large amount
in variation in mep attention to the topic over time, as treaty re-
vision and reform and the referenda that accompany them are rare
event and should only garner mep attention when such events oc-
cur. fig. 7(b) shows mep attention to the treaty change and ref-
erenda topic between 2000 and 2014 in terms of the number of
speeches associated with this topic. three distinct treaties were dis-
cussed and debated over this period. the    rst was the nice treaty,

(a)    financial & euro crises    dynamic topics

(b)    treaty changes & referenda    dynamic topic

(c)    fisheries    dynamic topic

figure 7: time plots for three sample dynamic topics across
all time windows, from 1999-q3 (#1) to 2014-q2 (#60). dates
on the x-axis correspond to the dates on which speeches were
made at ep plenary sessions.

which was agreed upon in 2001 and put to the vote in a referen-
dum in ireland in june 2001. the    no    vote in that resulted from
this referendum accounts for point a in fig. 7(b). the next set of
treaty related events to occur were the negotiations and failed rati-
   cation of the constitutional treaty between 2003 and 2005. this
process accounts for point b in fig. 7(b), that correspond to the in-
tergovernmental conference negotiating the treaty text that begun
in october 2003. in the end the constitutional treaty was rejected
by the french and dutch in referenda in may/june 2005. point c
indicates the date of the signing of the enlargement treaty in may
2004. the lisbon treaty was negotiated to replace the failed consti-
tutional treaty, and we observe a signi   cant peak in mep speeches
directly relating to the lisbon treaty when it was signed (point d),
and when the    rst irish referendum failed to ratify the treaty in june
2008 (point e). a similar peak in mep speeches relating to treaty
reform corresponds to the second irish referendum that eventually
approved the lisbon treaty in october 2009 (point f).

our third and    nal case study relates to    sheries policy. fisheries

0100200300number of speeches2000200520102015abcddateeuro crisisfinancial crisis050100150number of speeches20012004200620092011abcdefdate050100150200number of speeches2000200520102015abdateis an interesting theme for the dynamic id96 approach to
detect, because it is more associated with the day-to-day function-
ing of the eu as a regulator of the    sheries industry, when com-
pared to more headline making policies and events like the eco-
nomic crisis and treaty changes. fig. 7(c) demonstrates the preva-
lence of the    sheries topic over time. as can be seen, meps are
seen to pay a reasonably stable level of attention to    sheries in
terms of the numbers of speeches being made between 2000 and
2010. this trend is interrupted in 2010, when an increase in mep
attention to the    sheries topic is observed. this can be explained by
the fact that in 2009 the european commission launched a public
consultation on reforming eu    sheries policy, the results of which
were presented to the parliament and council in april 2010. the
launch of this working document corresponds to a increase in the
number of mep speeches related to the    sheries topic as detected
by the dynamic topic model (point a). the peak in mep speech
making relating to this topic (point b) corresponds with commis-
sioner maria damanaki introducing a set of legislative proposals
designed to reform the common    sheries policy in a speech to the
european parliament in july 2011.

in general, the fact that the variation over time that we observe
in mep attention to these case study topics appears to be driven
by exogenous events provides a form of construct validity for our
id96 approach.

5.4 explaining mep speech counts
we now focus our attention on the 7th european parliament which
sat between 2009   2014. we focus on this term as a set of inter-
esting covariates are available at the mep level that can help us
explain mep contributions to a given topic. the dependent vari-
able we seek to explain is the observed variation in the number
of speeches each mep makes on each of our identi   ed dynamic
topics. we employ a count-model framework suitable for analyz-
ing count data [6]. the    rst issue to note with the count variable
under consideration is that there is a large number of zeros. this
is due to the fact that, for many topics, a considerable number of
meps are recorded as making no speeches. this is likely due to
the data-generating process in the topic model from which our de-
pendent variable emerges. as described in section 3.1, we apply
a single membership id96 approach where each speech
is associated with one topic. this assumption is generally unprob-
lematic, given the short amount of time allowed for speeches and
the concentrated nature of the messages meps seek to communi-
cate in them. however, any speeches that might contain multiple
topics are only counted towards a single topic in the model. the re-
sult is that, in some cases, the    true    number of topics addressed
by meps is under-represented and an in   ated zero count is ob-
served. in order to account for the in   ated zero count, we model
mep speech-making as a two-stage process using a zero-in   ated
negative binomial regression model [6]. a zero-in   ated negative
binomial model includes a logit regression component to capture
the binary process determining whether or not a mep speaks on
a topic, and a negative-binomial regression component that seeks
to capture the count process determining the number of speeches
made, given that a mep has chosen to speak on a topic.

in order to explain the variation observed in our dependent variable,
we include variables relating to mep   s ideology, voting behavior,
and the institutional structures in which they    nd themselves em-
bedded within. we account for the left-right ideological position of
a mep   s national party (as a proxy for mep ideology) using data
from [21]. following [17], we also include a measure of how often

figure 8: plot of coef   cients for regression model.

meps vote against their party group in favor of their national party
and vice versa. the idea behind including these variables is that
meps rebelling against one party in favor of another will either try
to explain such behavior in their speeches thus increasing the count,
or hide their behavior by making no speeches, thus decreasing the
count. these data were taken from an updated version of the [10]
dataset provided by those authors. in order to capture an mep   s
committee positions we include dummies for committee member-
ship, chairs, and rapporteurs in committees that are directly related
to a given topic. committees were manually matched with topics
to achieve this. we control for whether or not an mep serves in the
parliamentary leadership. controls are also included for the total
number of speeches made by an mep and the percentage of mep
speeches that are available in english as these are liable to affect
the observed mep speech count. finally, we also include dummy
variables to control for an mep   s country of origin, ep party-group
membership, and the topic on which they are speaking. all in-
stitutional and control variables were scraped from the legislative
observatory of the european parliament.

the regression presented in fig. 8 provides further validation for
the results of our id96 approach. the coef   cients of the
model have been exponentiated so as to represent odds ratios and
aid interpretation. for the logit component of the model account-
ing for zero in   ation, an exponentiated coef   cient value above 1
implies that an increase in that covariate leads to an increase in the
odds that a zero is observed (no speech is made), while any value
below 1 implies an increase that variable leads to a decrease in the
odds of a zero being observed (a speech being made). for the count
component of the model exponentiated coef   cient values above 1
are interpreted as implying a positive relationship between the pre-
dictor and outcome variable, while values below 1 imply a negative
relationship between the predictor and outcome variable.

we begin with the zero-in   ated component of the model in fig. 8.
the model suggests that a mep   s national party ideology impacts
upon whether or not they make speeches on a given topic, with
more right-wing meps tending to make no topic speeches more of-
ten than left-wing meps. furthermore, meps defecting to national
parties tend to make speeches more often than those not defecting,
while the opposite is true for meps defecting to ep groups from na-
tional parties. this is in line with the    ndings of [17] who demon-
strate that meps who rebel against their european party groups

party l-rmep defector to nat. partymep defector to ep groupep leadership=1chair of topic-relevant comm.=1rapporteur of topic-relevant comm.=1member of topic-relevant comm.=1mep's total speechespercent speeches translated.511.522.5odds ratiosspeech-count componentparty l-rmep defector to nat. partymep defector to ep groupep leadership=1chair of topic-relevant comm.=1rapporteur of topic-relevant comm.=1member of topic-relevant comm.=1mep's total speechespercent speeches translated05101520odds ratioszero-in   ated componenttend to make more speeches explaining why they do so, while those
rebelling against their national party tend to make less speeches ad-
vertising their defection from the national party majority.

of the institutionally related variables, holding a leadership posi-
tion or a chair of a topic relevant committee has no signi   cant rela-
tionship to mep speech making, while being a member of a com-
mittee relevant to a topic, or holding a rapporteurship for such a
topic-relevant committee signi   cantly impact upon whether or not
meps make a speech that topic. the odds that a mep makes no
speeches on a given topic decrease by a factor of 0.255 if a mep is
a rapporteur of a topic-relevant committee and decrease by a fac-
tor of 0.259 if that mep is a member of a topic-relevant committee.
the results also show that the odds of an mep making no speeches
on a given topic decrease for meps that make more speeches in to-
tal. the result relating to the percentage of mep speeches that are
in english (whether translated or originally so) is also found to be
signi   cant, suggesting that meps with more speeches available in
english tend to make speeches on a given topic more often.

moving to the speech-count component of the model, the results
further reinforce our expectations that mep positions within the
parliamentary committee system impact upon how much attention
they pay to a particular topic. when an mep holds a committee
chair, rapporteurship, or committee membership relevant to a par-
ticular topic, the odds that said mep will make a speech on that
topic increase by a factor of 1.173, 1.582, and 2.077 respectively.

in order to clarify the substantive size of the effects found in the
model, fig. 9(a) plots the odds ratio of different topics that entered
into the regression model but were not displayed in fig. 8. to plot
these    xed effects odds rations, we treat the euro crisis topic as
the baseline. as can be seen, there are signi   cant differences ob-
served between the prevalence of different topics. the most preva-
lent topic is related to administrative matters in the plenary, and the
odds of this topic appearing in an mep speech are about 3.5 times
greater than the odds of a speech relating to the euro crisis topic.
this is not surprising given that administrative matters frame all
discussions in the plenary. perhaps more surprising is the preva-
lence of the human rights topic relative to the other topics in the
analysis. the odds of a speech relating to human rights is about 3
times greater than the odds that a speech relates to the euro crisis.
the relative prevalence of this topic suggests that meps regularly
comment on human rights issues. indeed, when one delves into
the speeches appearing in this topic, a broad concern for violations
of human rights across different contexts is evident. the relative
prevalence of topics such as gender equality and social policy is
also noteworthy, and suggests that the parliament actively debates
such issues despite the fact that the eu has little formal legislative
competencies in these areas.

fig. 9(b) plots the odds ratios associated with different party groups
within the parliament, treating the european people   s party (epp)
group as the baseline. as can be seen, there is some variation
in the odds that a speech on a given topic emerges from a given
party, but most of these differences are not statistically signi   cant.
this result re   ects the fact that speech time is distributed between
party groups according to their relative size. both the progressive
alliance of socialists and democrats (s & d) and the european
greens   european free alliance (g   efa) groups are found to dif-
fer from the epp group in terms of the odds a speech on a given
topic comes from them. the odds of a topic speech being from
either of these groups is less than the odds of a topic speech being

(a) topic    xed effects topic

(b) party group    xed effects

figure 9: fixed effects from regression model.

from the epp by a factor of just over 0.1.

6. conclusions
in this paper, we have proposed a new two-layer matrix factoriza-
tion methodology for identifying topics in large political speech
corpora over time, designed to identify both niche topics related to
events at a particular point in time and broad, long-running topics.
we applied this method to a new corpus of all     210k english
language plenary speeches from the european parliament during
a 15 year period.
in terms of providing substantive insight into
the political processes of the european parliament, the topic mod-
eling method has allowed us to unveil the political agenda in the
parliament, and the manner in which this has evolved over the
time period under consideration. by considering three distinct case
studies, we have demonstrated the distinctions that can be drawn
between the day-to-day political work of the parliament in policy
areas such as    sheries on the one hand, and the manner in which
exogenous events such as economic crises and failed treaty refer-
enda can give rise to new topics of discussion between meps on
the other. once the parliamentary agenda was extracted from the
corpus of speeches, we explored the determinants of mep attention
to particular topics in the 7th sitting of the parliament. we demon-
strated how mep ideology and voting behavior affect whether or
not they choose to contribute to a topic, and once such a decision
has been made, we demonstrated how the committee structure of
the parliament structures mep contributions on a given topic.

the initial insights provide by the dynamic id96 ap-
proach presented in this paper demonstrate the potential of these
methods to uncover the latent dynamics in mep speech-making ac-
tivities and thus allow for new insights into how the eu functions
as a political system. much remains to be explored in terms of the
patterns in political attention that emerge from the id96
approach. for instance, one would expect that political attention

plenary administrationhuman rightsfinancial crisisgender equalityfisheriesbudgetcfsprussiasocial policyclimate changechild protectiontaxenlargementfoot and mouthtreaties and referenda01234odds ratiosefdds&dgue-nglg-efaaldeecr.6.811.21.4odds ratios[15] d. o   callaghan, d. greene, j. carthy, and p. cunningham.

an analysis of the coherence of descriptors in topic
modeling. id109 with applications (eswa), 2015.
[16] s.-o. proksch and j. b. slapin. position taking in european

parliament speeches. british journal of political science,
40(03):587   611, 2010.

[17] s.-o. proksch and j. b. slapin. the politics of parliamentary

debate: parties, rebels and representation. cambridge
university press, 2014.

[18] k. m. quinn, b. l. monroe, m. colaresi, m. h. crespin, and
d. r. radev. how to analyze political attention with minimal
assumptions and costs. american journal of political
science, 54(1):209   228, 2010.

[19] t. raunio. parliamentary questions in the european

parliament: representation, information and control. the
journal of legislative studies, 2(4):356   382, 1996.

[20] a. saha and v. sindhwani. learning evolving and emerging

topics in social media: a dynamic nmf approach with
temporal id173. in proc. 5th acm int. conf. web
search and data mining, pages 693   702, 2012.

[21] r. scully, s. hix, and d. m. farrell. national or european

parliamentarians? evidence from a new survey of the
members of the european parliament. jcms: journal of
common market studies, 50(4):670   683, 2012.

[22] j. b. slapin and s. o. proksch. look who   s talking:

parliamentary debate in the european union. european
union politics, 11(3):333   357, 2010.

[23] m. steyvers and t. grif   ths. probabilistic topic models. in

t. landauer, d. mcnamara, s. dennis, and w. kintsch,
editors, latent semantic analysis: a road to meaning.
laurence erlbaum, 2006.

[24] r. sulo, t. berger-wolf, and r. grossman. meaningful

selection of temporal resolution for dynamic networks. in
proc. 8th workshop on mining and learning with graphs,
pages 127   136. acm, 2010.

[25] q. wang, z. cao, j. xu, and h. li. group matrix

factorization for scalable id96. in proc. 35th
sigir conf. on research and development in information
retrieval, pages 375   384. acm, 2012.

[26] n. yordanova. the rationale behind committee assignment

in the european parliament distributive, informational and
partisan perspectives. european union politics,
10(2):253   280, 2009.

might well translate into in   uence over policy outcomes decided
upon in the parliament. tracing in   uence to date has been dif   -
cult, as a macro-level picture of where and on what topics mep
attention lies has been unavailable. linking political attention to
political outcomes would help to unveil who gets what and when in
european politics, which is a central concern for a political system
that is often criticized for lacking democratic legitimacy. this is but
one direction in which future research might proceed.

while this paper has focused on european parliament speeches, the
proposed id96 method has a number of potential appli-
cations in the study of politics, including the analysis of speeches
in other parliaments, political manifestos, and other more tradi-
tional forms of political texts. it is also generally appropriate in
domains where large-scale, longitudinal text corpora are naturally
represented in discrete segments.
acknowledgments. this research was partly supported by science
foundation ireland (sfi) under grant number sfi/12/rc/2289.

7. references
[1] g. benedetto. rapporteurs as legislative entrepreneurs: the

dynamics of the codecision procedure in europe   s parliament.
journal of european public policy, 12(1):67   88, 2005.
[2] d. m. blei and j. d. lafferty. dynamic topic models. in

proc. 23rd international conference on machine learning,
pages 113   120, 2006.

[3] d. m. blei, a. y. ng, and m. i. jordan. latent dirichlet

allocation. journal of machine learning research,
3:993   1022, 2003.

[4] c. boutsidis and e. gallopoulos. svd based initialization: a

head start for non-negative id105. pattern
recognition, 2008.

[5] s. bowler and d. m. farrell. the organizing of the european

parliament: committees, specialization and co-ordination.
british journal of political science, 25(02):219   243, 1995.

[6] a. c. cameron and p. k. trivedi. regression analysis of

count data, volume 53. cambridge university press, 2013.
[7] j. chang, j. boyd-graber, s. gerrish, c. wang, and d. m.

blei. reading tea leaves: how humans interpret topic
models. in nips, 2009.

[8] d. greene, g. cagney, n. krogan, and p. cunningham.

ensemble non-negative id105 methods for
id91 protein-protein interactions. bioinformatics,
24(15):1722   1728, 2008.

[9] j. grimmer. a bayesian hierarchical topic model for political
texts: measuring expressed agendas in senate press releases.
political analysis, 18(1):1   35, 2010.

[10] s. hix, a. noury, and g. roland. dimensions of politics in

the european parliament. american journal of political
science, 50(2):494   520, 2006.

[11] c. b. jensen, s.-o. proksch, and j. b. slapin. parliamentary
questions, oversight, and national opposition status in the
european parliament. legislative studies quarterly,
38(2):259   282, 2013.

[12] d. d. lee and h. s. seung. learning the parts of objects by

non-negative id105. nature, 401:788   91, 1999.

[13] c. lin. projected gradient methods for non-negative matrix

factorization. neural computation, 19(10):2756   2779, 2007.

[14] t. mikolov, k. chen, g. corrado, and j. dean. ef   cient

estimation of word representations in vector space. corr,
abs/1301.3781, 2013.

