5
1
0
2

 

y
a
m
1
3

 

 
 
]
i

a
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
0
3
0
0

.

6
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

interactive knowledge base population

travis wolfe mark dredze

james may   eld paul mcnamee

craig harman tim finin    benjamin van durme

human language technology center of excellence

johns hopkins university

   university of maryland, baltimore county

abstract

most work on building knowledge bases has
focused on collecting entities and facts from
as large a collection of documents as possible.
we argue for and describe a new paradigm
where the focus is on a high-recall extraction
over a small collection of documents under the
supervision of a human expert, that we call in-
teractive knowledge base population (ikbp).

1 introduction

work on knowledge base population in its various
forms (e.g., trec kba and tac kbp), which we
will describe using the umbrella acronym kbp, has
primarily focused on large text collections. the
knowledge base, in the ideal sense, is the repository
for all information captured from this collection of
text. most kbp work has focused on large, hetero-
geneous text collections, like wikipedia or the in-
ternet, containing a variety of topics, each of which
has its own set of relevant entities, types of facts,
writing styles, etc. this variability and diversity is
one of the things that makes entity linking, relation
identi   cation, and other tasks dif   cult in the large.

in contrast, we are concerned with smaller, more
topically focused collections of restricted hetero-
geneity. this restricted paradigm changes the kbp
problem signi   cantly, e.g. a system is not able to
rely on data redundancy, as most facts will only be
stated once. this means that a system must ad-
dress more vague or ambiguous ways of expressing
a proposition than would be considered by a system
designed for the large-text version of the problem.
yet this setting also offers new opportunities for

kbp systems. in the small text collection paradigm,
asking a user for a fairly complete annotation of the
entities and proposition expressed in text is feasible,
and system output can be vetted by an expert. we
term this paradigm interactive kbp (ikbp).

the ikbp paradigm can apply to a variety of user
types. roughly speaking, they are any information
analyst whose work   ow involves carefully reading
textual information and producing reports (e.g., a
dedicated hobbyist creating a wikipedia page, a
journalist writing a newspaper article, or a    nan-
cial analyst generating a quarterly summary report).
these users can rely on a pocket kb     a small do-
main or user-speci   c knowledge base used as a tool
for understanding new sources and producing re-
ports. pocket kbs accurately capture the scope of
ambiguity represented in a particular topic of docu-
ments (as opposed to a global kb which will con-
tain many irrelevant entities and facts that introduce
noise into id136s). this concept of a database
that matches a particular topic or domain opens the
door to more speculative id136s and domain-
speci   c learning that is more computationally ef   -
cient than would be possible for general kbs.

we describe the ikbp setting, summarize our
work in building components of an ikbp pipeline,
and demonstrate how the methods developed for
kbp in the general sense can be extended to ikbp.

2 interactive knowledge base population

ideal users professional analysts across a wide va-
riety of disciplines are tasked with reading and syn-
thesizing articles on a regular basis. examples in-
clude    nancial analysts who need to keep track of a

set of companies and entities relevant to a portfolio,
scienti   c researchers who must read new articles re-
lated to their research, and public relations staff who
track stories relating to their clients. unlike the aver-
age individual, analysts have a good deal of domain
knowledge on their topic, and are willing and able
to invest time and effort to extending their knowl-
edge and developing resources useful for their do-
main of interest. much of their time is spent reading
source articles, identifying entities of interest, un-
derstanding propositions about them, and recalling
these facts while writing a report to synthesize their
   ndings. these analysts are experts because of the
id136s they can draw from evidence, but their
ef   ciency is limited by the need to decompress (i.e.,
read, comprehend, recall) information contained in
natural language.

given their investment in the domain, analysts can
derive long term bene   t from providing minimal an-
notations while reading, storing them as structured
data to be used later when a report is synthesized.
annotations as simple as a bag of entity mentions
(coreference) and facts (id36s) offer a
powerful index and summary of source documents.
additionally, this structured data supported by tex-
tual mentions offers the analyst a rich way to cite
claims made in a report. this information captured
by the analyst constitutes a lightweight ad-hoc kb.
interactive work   ow an ikbp system utilizes
provided analyst annotations by interesting itself
into an analyst   s document-centric1 work   ow, boot-
strapping a light-weight knowledge base as fast as
possible.
ikbp is not simply active learning for
kbp: while having a human in the loop providing
feedback to the system will indeed allow for updat-
ing and improving models, the users in this case are
not primarily concerned with assisting in building
a better system. rather, they are consumers of the
output of the system (facts discovered from content)
that provide feedback to the system as a by-product
of their professional desire to    lter and correct out-
put as a part of their writing process.

to meet the goal of being minimally obstructive

1here we describe the reports as text documents, but this
need not be the case. ikbp construed broadly works on any
source that may be used to ground out a statement made in a
report, such as a spreadsheet, output of machine translation or
id103, or even richer media like images or video.

to the user, the primary interface for ikbp is a docu-
ment viewer. during reading, this interface enables
a user to make annotations about entities and rela-
tions that are important. during report writing the
interface should allow for linking statement back to
supporting evidence. in some cases this may be pos-
sible to do fully automatically (e.g. linking a state-
ment about an entity   s birth-date or employer), but
in other cases the link must be explicitly added by
the user for the purpose of structured citation (e.g. a
statement that an entity is a    supporter    of a group
might be tied back to mentions of events between
that entity and group). an entity   s birth-date or em-
ployer), while in more complex cases the user may
opt to make an explicit citation (e.g. that an entity is
a    supporter    of a group might be tied back to men-
tions of events between that entity and group).

ikbp should be seen as a natural complement to
efforts such as topic detection and tracking (tdt)
(allan et al., 1998) or knowledge base acceleration
(kba), which provide tools that triage high-volume
content streams to a smaller, personalized collection
that the user can then analyze in depth.

pocket kbs pocket kbs are task-speci   c knowl-
edge bases typically associated with a single user
or group of users, such as a group of co-authors
working on a research paper. first, there are some
properties of kbs that will vary from topic to topic
and are poorly modeled by the classic notion of a
global kb. for example, while an entity   s popular-
ity is an informative prior for the referent of an un-
known mention (ji and grishman, 2011), popularity
is de   ned as an empirical distribution, which will
vary greatly across topics. any global distribution
over entities will be greatly biased in some domains,
and serve as a poor prior. pocket kbs can over-
come this bias because they focus on a coherent
topic or domain. while methods like hierarchical
bayesian models offer topical specialization and al-
low for global backoff, they do not share a pocket
kb   s bene   ts of sparsity and compactness.

another practical issue addressed by pocket kbs
is that of ownership and permissions. since they are
allocated to a particular user or small group, curato-
rial choices do not affect other users (or if they do it,
is clear that the owner of the pocket kb comes    rst).
kbs that store global information that affects many
users, such as in wikipedia and freebase, must use

gate-keepers to moderate changes. pocket kbs are
an ef   cient solution for cases where there is a lim-
ited amount of overlap among users    topics.

scope of ambiguity.

pocket kbs also elegantly handle the is-
sues of
stoyanov et
al. (stoyanov et al., 2012) argue for the notion of a
context in which a reader can be expected to perform
entity linking, based on grice   s principle of cooper-
ative communication (grice, 1975). their claim is
that most entity linking choices are easy in the cor-
rect context. they explored ways to derive the cor-
rect context from a global kb. while this is a gen-
eral way to instantiate contexts to reason about and
disambiguate entities, we argue that a pocket kb
that is constructed to only ever include entities that
are relevant to a particular topic is a more ef   cient
way to construct a context.

lastly pocket kbs sidestep engineering issues
around supporting a large global kb. the tools
needed to do ai research on large kbs like free-
base range from cumbersome to lacking. as a
result, many state-of-the-art systems are designed
as long pipelines that operate only in batch mode,
often requiring days to run a single experiment
(mcnamee et al., 2013b). working with pocket
kbs requires much less engineering time and allow
(non-systems) researchers to run experiments more
quickly.

3 relation to existing work

since 2009, the text analysis conference knowl-
edge base population (tac kbp) workshops have
run competitions on entity linking (determine the
referent of a named entity mention), slot    lling
(given an entity and a relation,    nd string-valued
items that complete the relation), and cold start
(combine the two previous tasks with no provided
kb). cold start is most similar to ikbp as they both
begin with an empty kb. they differ in that tac fo-
cuses on large bodies of text and expects of   ine pro-
cessing rather than under the supervision of a user.
nonetheless, an online optimize cold start system
could be the heart of an ikbp system.

another parallel line of work is the text retrieval
conference   s workshop on knowledge base accel-
eration (trec kba). the vital filtering task evalu-
ates how well a system can link documents in a very

high volume document stream (a billion documents)
to entities in a populated knowledge base. once doc-
uments are linked to entities, the streaming slot fill-
ing task takes these mentions and updates kb entries
with the new information in the linked document.
this task is relevant to ikbp as it solves the ir task
of    nding documents for an analyst to read.

a third line of relevant work is topic detection
and tracking (tdt) (allan et al., 1998).
its goal
was to    nd series of articles that constituted a co-
herent    news story    or topic. there is signi   cant
overlap between this and ikbp, including cross-
document coreference resolution and event detec-
tion and linking. like tdt, there is a lot of work
in    rst story detection in social media, such as os-
borne et al. (osborne et al., 2014) these systems,
while tuned to social media, are also well suited to
linking events as a part of ikbp.

have

many

finally,

systems

addressed
tasks similar
to ikbp, such as interactive ie
(culotta et al., 2006), post-hoc diagnostics of ie
errors (das sarma et al., 2010), and robust cross-
document entity coreference (minton et al., 2011).
there has been a variety of work addressing the
challenges of knowledge base construction and re-
lation extraction at web-scale (carlson et al., 2010;
kasneci et al., 2009;
nakashole et al., 2011;
zhu et al., 2009), and deepdive (niu et al., 2012)
in particular emphasizes provenance information
and user feedback. most signi   cantly, budlong et
al. (budlong et al., 2013) built a system to do ikbp
for intelligence analysts based on ie tools such as
serif (boschee et al., 2005);
including an inter-
face for analysts to view and correct annotations.
it differed from our ikbp notion in its focus on
entity-centric link analysis and in not stressing user
citation and report writing or exploiting pocket kbs
as valuable aspects of the task.

4 our work on ikbp

visualization quicklime is a tool designed to show
the user documents that connect to the knowledge
base that we   ve built so far. the tool presents con-
tent similar to what you might see in an online
news site, and highlights all of the entities and rela-
tion triggers produced from within-document coref-
erence resolution and ace-style id36

systems, with links to kb entries. these annotations
help the reader skim the document to get an entity or
relation-centric summary or    nd the source of a par-
ticular fact that the system has asserted.

we

have

kelvin

adapted

kelvin
(mcnamee et al., 2012; mcnamee et al., 2013a;
may   eld et al., 2014), the top-ranked system for the
tac cold start kbp task in 2012 and 2013, for
building pocket kbs. kelvin uses the bbn tools
serif and facets to perform document
level
analysis,
including detection of named entities,
within-document coreference analysis, and detec-
tion of entity relations. serif is an ace system,
which is more-or-less mappable onto the tac-kbp
schema. facets is a maximum id178 tagger
that extracts attributes from personal noun phrases.
additional within-document coreference analysis
is done using data from the stanford nlp coref
system and by manually developed rules.

kripke cross-document entity coreference clus-
tering is done by kripke, which looks for high lev-
els of string matching (through a number of name-
matching metrics) and for contextual matching (us-
ing named entities that are common across source
documents). co-occurring named entity mentions
and name matching are the only features used by
kripke. the algorithm performs agglomerative clus-
tering on document-level entities. a cascade of fu-
sion steps is performed, where conditions for name
and context matching are slowly relaxed from strict
to more generous constraints. after performing
document-level analysis and cross-document coref-
erence, kelvin take steps to remove spurious as-
sertions (using hand-written rules and blacklists to
exclude unlikely facts), eliminates extraneous facts
(e.g., a person can only have one city of birth and a
reasonable number of children) and facts with insuf-
   cient support, and then performs logical id136
to augment the resulting knowledge base. the log-
ical id136 uses procedurally implemented for-
ward chaining rules.

entity disambiguation we have are using two
systems for performing entity disambiguation, one
designed to work well when entities are known and
another that performs a more careful analysis to
bootstrap a set of lesser known entities. slinky
(benton et al., 2014) is a streaming entity linker de-
signed to support both high throughput and low la-

tency linking. most work on entity linking has
treated kbp as a batch task; systems typically don   t
optimize for speed, meaning batch runs can take
hours. slinky is optimized for ikbp and can quickly
produce a top-k list of entity labels for each men-
tion.

when a set of entities is not known, parma
(wolfe et al., 2013), which works with topically re-
lated pairs documents, constructs an alignment be-
tween the entities and events mentioned. parma can
bootstrap a small kb by linking new mentions to
canonical mentions in an existing document (i.e., a
light-weight kb) or decide to create a new entity if
the mentions do not appear to be coreferent. be-
cause parma works at the level of pairs of docu-
ments, it can afford to use complex discourse fea-
tures and joint id136, which are not feasible at
large scale; this makes it ideal for the    rst stage of
ikbp.

relation identi   cation a large part of ikbp is
identifying basic propositions stated in documents.
one version of this task is id14
(srl) (gildea and jurafsky, 2002): identifying and
labeling the types of semantic arguments tied to se-
mantic predicates. as a potential user might wish to
analyze language content in low resource languages
or domains, we are exploring models for low-
resource srl, such as that of gorid113y et al. (2014).
ace (doddington et al., 2004) is another view that
comprises entities, values, time expressions, rela-
tions, and events. the set of relations and events
that ace annotated are closed-class but high-value,
which makes them a nice compromise between com-
plexity (both annotation and learning) and utility to
the user. we have ongoing work towards building an
interactive ace system.

5 conclusion

ikbp is a new variant of kbp tailored for long-term,
focused information analysis. it captures knowledge
from a user   s work   ow while offering the ability to
add rich structure to their summary reports. much
previous work can be extended to support ikbp sys-
tems. many aspects of ikbp remain unexplored:
the annotation ui, which can have a large effect on
an ikbp system   s success; ikbp can bene   t from
more speculative id136s that rely on a human in

the loop, as users may write domain-speci   c infer-
ence rules; connecting ikbp together across many
users, and merging pocket kbs is an open problem,
and merging two clean pocket kbs could produce a
more reliable result than building a global kb.

references
[allan et al.1998] james allan,

jaime g carbonell,
george doddington, jonathan yamron, and yiming
yang. 1998. topic detection and tracking pilot study
   nal report. in proc. darpa broadcast news tran-
scription and understanding workshop.

[benton et al.2014] adrian benton, jay deyoung, adam
teichert, mark dredze, benjamin van durme,
stephen mayhew, and max thomas. 2014. faster
(and better) entity linking with cascades.
in nips
workshop on automated knowledge base construc-
tion.

boschee,

[boschee et al.2005] elizabeth

ralph
weischedel, and alex zamanian.
2005. auto-
matic information extraction. in intelligence analysis.
[budlong et al.2013] emily budlong, carrie pine, mark
zappavigna, james homer, charles proefrock, john
gucwa, michael crystal, and ralph m. weischedel.
2013. interactive information extraction and naviga-
tion to enable effective link analysis and visualization
of unstructured text. in iaai.

[carlson et al.2010] andrew carlson, justin betteridge,
bryan kisiel, burr settles, estevam r hruschka jr,
and tom m mitchell. 2010. toward an architecture
for never-ending language learning. in aaai.

[culotta et al.2006] aron culotta, trausti kristjansson,
andrew mccallum, and paul viola. 2006. correc-
tive feedback and persistent learning for information
extraction. arti   cial intelligence.

[das sarma et al.2010] anish das sarma, alpa jain, and
divesh srivastava. 2010. i4e: interactive investigation
of iterative information extraction. in sigmod.

[doddington et al.2004] george r doddington, alexis
mitchell, mark a przybocki, lance a ramshaw,
stephanie strassel, and ralph m weischedel. 2004.
the automatic content extraction (ace) program-
tasks, data, and evaluation. in lrec.

[gildea and jurafsky2002] daniel gildea and daniel ju-
rafsky. 2002. automatic labeling of semantic roles.
computational linguistics, 28(3):245   288.

[gorid113y et al.2014] matthew r. gorid113y, margaret
mitchell, benjamin van durme, and mark dredze.
2014. low-resource id14. in acl.

[grice1975] h. p. grice. 1975. logic and conversation.
in peter cole and jerry l. morgan, editors, syntax and
semantics: vol. 3: speech acts. academic press.

[ji and grishman2011] heng ji and ralph grishman.
2011. knowledge base population: successful ap-
proaches and challenges. in acl.

[kasneci et al.2009] gjergji kasneci, maya ramanath,
fabian suchanek, and gerhard weikum. 2009. the
yago-naga approach to knowledge discovery. in sig-
mod.

[may   eld et al.2014] james may   eld, paul mcnamee,
craig harman, tim finin, and dawn lawrie. 2014.
kelvin: extracting knowledge from large text col-
lections.
in aaai fall symposium on natural lan-
guage access to big data. aaai press, november.

[mcnamee et al.2012] paul mcnamee, veselin stoyanov,
james may   eld, tim finin, tim oates, tan xu, dou-
glas w oard, and dawn lawrie. 2012. hltcoe par-
ticipation at tac 2012: entity linking and cold start
knowledge base construction. in tac.

[mcnamee et al.2013a] paul mcnamee, tim finin,
dawn lawrie, james may   eld, dawn lawrie, tim
finin, james may   eld, paul mcnamee, paul mc-
namee, james may   eld, et al.
2013a. hltcoe
participation at tac 2013.
in 6th text analysis
conference. nist.

[mcnamee et al.2013b] paul mcnamee, time finin,
dawn lawrie, and james may   eld. 2013b. kelvin
2.0: hltcoe progress in cold start knowledge base
population, november.

[minton et al.2011] steven minton, sofus macskassy, pe-
ter lamonica, kane see, craig knoblock, greg bar-
ish, matthew michelson, and raymond liuzzi. 2011.
monitoring entities in an uncertain world: entity reso-
lution and referential integrity. in iaai.

[nakashole et al.2011] ndapandula nakashole, martin
theobald, and gerhard weikum.
2011. scalable
knowledge harvesting with high precision and high re-
call. in wsdm.

[niu et al.2012] feng niu, ce zhang, christopher r  e,
and jude w shavlik. 2012. deepdive: web-scale
knowledge-base construction using statistical learning
and id136. in vlds, pages 25   28.

[osborne et al.2014] miles osborne,

sean moran,
richard mccreadie, alexander von l  unen, martin
sykora, amparo cano, neil ireson, craig macdonald,
iadh ounis, yulan he, tom jackson, fabio ciravegna,
and ann o   brien.
real-time detection,
tracking, and monitoring of automatically discovered
events in social media. in acl.

2014.

[stoyanov et al.2012] veselin stoyanov, james may   eld,
tan xu, doug oard, dawn lawrie, tim oates, and
tim finin. 2012. a context-aware approach to en-
tity linking. in joint workshop on automatic knowl-
edge base construction and web-scale knowledge ex-
traction. acl, june.

[wolfe et al.2013] t. wolfe, b. van durme, m. dredze,
n. andrews, c. beller, c. callison-burch, j. dey-
oung, j. snyder, j. weese, t. xu, et al. 2013. parma:
a predicate argument aligner. in acl.

[zhu et al.2009] jun zhu, zaiqing nie, xiaojiang liu,
bo zhang, and ji-rong wen. 2009. statsnowball: a
statistical approach to extracting entity relationships.
in www.

