re   ections on sentiment/opinion analysis

jiwei li1 and eduard hovy2

1computer science department, stanford university, stanford, ca 94305, usa

2language technology institute, carnegie mellon university, pittsburgh, pa 15213, usa

jiweil@stanford.edu

hovy@cmu.edu

1

introduction

id31 is an application of natural lan-
guage processing that focuses on identifying ex-
pressions that re   ect authors    opinion-based atti-
tude (i.e., good or bad, like or dislike) toward en-
tities (e.g., products, topics, issues) or facets of
them (e.g., price, quality).

since the early 2000s, a large number of mod-
els and frameworks have been introduced to ad-
dress this application, with emphasis on various
aspects like opinion related entity exaction, review
mining, topic mining, sentiment summarization,
recommendation, and these extracted from signif-
icantly diverse text sources including product re-
views, news articles, social media (blogs, twitter,
forum discussions), and so on.

however, despite this activity, disappointingly
little has been published about what exactly a sen-
timent or opinion actually is. it is generally simply
assumed that two (or perhaps three) polar values
positive, negative, neutral) are enough, and that
they are clear, and that anyone would agree on how
to assign such labels to arbitrary texts. further,
existing methods, despite employing increasingly
sophisticated (and of course more powerful) mod-
els (e.g., neural nets), still essentially boil down
to considering individual or local combinations of
words and matching them against prede   ned lists
of words with    xed sentiment values, and thus
hardly transcend what was described in the early
work by pang et al. (2002).

there is nothing against simple methods when
they work, but they do not always work. the goal
of this paper is to identify why sometimes they do
not work, and where to go next, we try to iden-
tify gaps in the current id31 litera-
ture and to outline practical computational ways
to address these issues.

goals, expectations and sentiments. we be-
gin with the fundamental question    what make

people hold positive attitudes towards some enti-
ties and negative attitudes toward others?   . the
answer to this question is a psychological state
that relates to the opinion holder   s satisfaction
and dissatisfaction with some aspect of the topic
in question. one of only two principal factors
determines the answer: either (1) the holder   s
deep emotionally-driven, non-logical native pref-
erences, or (2) whether (and how well) one of the
holder   s goals is ful   lled, and how (in what ways)
the goal is ful   lled.

examples of the former are re   ected in sen-
tences like    i just like red    or    seeing that makes
me happy   . they are typi   ed by adverbs like
   just    and    simply    that suggest that no further
conscious psychological re   ection or motivation
obtains. of this class of factor we can say noth-
ing computationally, and do not address it in the
rest of this chapter.

fortunately, a large proportion of the attitudes
people write about re   ect the other factor, which
one can summarize as goal-driven utility. this re-
lates primarily to consequentialism: both to utili-
tarianism, in which pleasure, economic well-being
and the lack of suffering are considered desirable,
but also to the general case that morally justi   able
actions (and the objects that enable them) are de-
sirable. that is, the ultimate basis for any judg-
ment about the rightness or wrongness of one   s ac-
tions, and hence of the objects that support/enable
them, is a consideration of their outcome, or con-
sequence.

in everyday life, people establish and maintain
goals or expectations, both long-term or short-
term, urgent or not-urgent, ones. achieving these
goals would    ll one with satisfaction, otherwise
dissatisfaction: a man walks into a restaurant to
achieve the goal of getting full, he cannot be sat-
is   ed if all food was sold out (the main goal not
being achieved). a voter would not be satis   ed
if his candidate or party fails to win an election,

5
1
0
2

 
l
u
j
 

6

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
6
3
6
1
0

.

7
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

since the longer-term consequences would gener-
ally work against his own preferences. the gener-
ation of sentiment-related texts is guided by such
sorts of mental satisfaction and dissatisfaction in-
duced by goals being achieved or needs being ful-
   lled.

we next provide some examples to illustrate
why identifying these aspects is essential and fun-
damental for adequate sentiment/opinion analysis.
following the most popular motivation for com-
putational id31, suppose we wish to
analyze customers    opinions towards a product or
an offering.
it is not suf   cient to simply deter-
mine that someone likes or dislikes something; to
make that knowledge useful and actionable, one
also wants to know why that is the case. espe-
cially when one would like to change the opinion,
it is important to determine what it is about the
topic that needs to be changed.

case (1)

    question: why did the customer like deter-

gent x?

    customer   s review: the detergent removes

stubborn stains.

no general sentiment indicator is found in the
above review. but the review directly provides the
reason, and assuming his/her goal of clean cloth-
ing is achieved, it is evident that the opinion holder
holds a positive opinion towards the detergent.

case (2)

    question: why did the traveller dislike    ight

y?

    customer   s review: the food was good. the
crew was helpful and took care of everything.
the service was ef   cient. however the    ight
was supposed to to take 1.5 hours but was 3
hours late, and i missed my next connecting
   ight.

the major goal of taking a    ight is to get to your
destination, which is more important than goals
like enjoying one   s food and receiving pampering
service. while multiple simultaneous goals induce
competing opinion decisions, the presence of an
importance ranking among them determines the
overall sentiment.

case (3)

    question: why did the customer visit restau-

rant z?

    review1: the food is bad.
    review2: the waiter was kind but the food

was bad.

    review3: the food was good but the waiter

was rude.

although the primary goal of being sated may be
achieved, secondary goals such as enjoying the
food and receiving respectful service can be vio-
lated in various combinations. often, these goals
pertain to the method by which the primary goal
was achieved;
to the question
   how?    rather than    why?   .

in other words,

a sentiment determination algorithm that can
provide more than just a simple opinion label
thus has to pay attention both to the primary
reason behind the holder   s involvement with the
topic (   why?   ) and to the secondary reasons (both
   why?    and    how?   ), and has to be able to deter-
mine their relative importance and relationship to
the primary goal.

goals and expectations are personal. as dif-
ferent people (opinion holders) are from different
backgrounds, have different personalities, and are
in different situations, they have different goals,
needs, and the expectations of life. this diversity
generally leads to completely diverse opinions to-
wards the same entity, the same action, and the
same situation: a billionaire wouldn   t be the least
bit concerned with the price in a bread shop but
would consider the quality, while a beggar might
care only about the price. this rather banal obser-
vation is explained best by maslow   s famous hier-
archy of needs (maslow, 1943), in which the beg-
gar   s attention focuses on maslow   s physiologi-
cal needs while the billionaire   s focuses on self-
actualization; more on this in section 3.1.

life requires trade-offs. most situations in
real life address many personal needs simultane-
ously. people thus face trade-offs between their
goals, which entails sacri   cing the achievement of
one goal for the satisfaction of another. given the
variability among people, the rankings and deci-
sion procedures will also from individual to in-
dividual. however, maslow   s hierarchy describes

the general behavioral trends of people in most so-
cieties and situations.
complex sentiment expressions. as far as we
see, current opinion analysis frameworks mostly
fail
to address the kinds of issues mentioned
above, and thereby impair a deeper understand-
ing about opinion or sentiment. as a result, they
   nd it impossible to provide even rudimentary
approaches to cases such as the following (from
(hovy, 2015)):

1. peter thinks the pants are great and i cannot

agree more.

2. peter thinks the pants are great but i don   t

agree.

3. sometime i like it but sometimes i hate it.

4. he was half excited, half terri   ed.

5. the movie is indeed wonderful, but for some

reason, i just don   t like it.

6. why i won   t buy this game even though i like

it.

in this paper, we explore the feasibility of address-
ing these issues in a practical way using machine
learning techniques currently available.

2 a review of current sentiment

analysis

here we give a brief overview of tasks in current
id31 literature. more details can be
found in (liu, 2010; liu, 2012).

the key points involved at the algorithm level
in the id31 literature follow the ba-
sic approaches of statistical machine learning, in
which a gold-standard labeling of training data is
obtained through manual annotation or other data
harvesting approaches (e.g., semi-supervised or
weakly supervised), and this is then used to train a
variety of association-learning techniques who are
then tested on new material. usually, some text
unit has to be identi   ed and then associated with a
sentiment label (e.g., positive, neutral, negative).
based on the annotated dataset, the techniques
learn that vocabulary items like    bad   ,    awful   ,
and    disgusting    are negative sentiment indicators
while    good   ,    fantastic    and    awesome    are pos-
itive ones. the main complexity lies in learning
which words carry some opinion and, especially,

what to decide in cases where different words with
opposite labels appear in the same clause.

basic id31 identi   es the simple
polarity of a text unit (e.g., a token, a phrase, a
sentence, or a document) and is framed as a bi-
nary or multi-class classi   cation task; see for ex-
ample pang et al    s work (2002) that uses a uni-
gram/bigram feature-based id166 classi   er. over
the past 15 years, techniques have evolved from
simple rule-based word matching to more sophis-
ticated feature and signal (e.g., local word com-
position, facets of topics, opinion holder) identi-
   cation and combination, from the level of single
tokens to entire documents, and from       at    word
strings without any syntactic structure at all to in-
corporation of complex linguistic structures (e.g.,
discourse or mixed-affect sentences); see (pang
and lee, 2004; hu and liu, 2004; wiebe et al.,
2005; nakagawa et al., 2010; maas et al., 2011;
tang et al., b; qiu et al., 2011; wang and manning,
2012; tang et al., a; yang and cardie, 2014a; sny-
der and barzilay, 2007). recent progress in neural
models provides new techniques for local compo-
sition of both opinion and structure (e.g., subordi-
nation, conjunction) using distributed representa-
tions of text units (e.g., (socher et al., 2013; irsoy
and cardie, 2014a; irsoy and cardie, 2014b; tang,
2015; tang et al., 2014)).

a supporting line of research extends the ba-
sic sentiment classi   cation to include related as-
pects and facets, such as identifying opinion hold-
ers, the topics of opinions, topics not explicitly
mentioned in the text, etc.; see (choi et al., 2006;
kim and hovy, 2006; kim and hovy, 2004; li
and hovy, 2014; jin et al., 2009; breck et al.,
2007; johansson and moschitti, 2010; yang and
cardie, 2012; yang and cardie, 2013; yang and
cardie, 2014b). these approaches usually employ
sequence labeling models (e.g., crf (lafferty et
al., 2001), id48 (liu et al., 2004)) to identify
whether the current token corresponds to a speci   c
sentiment-related aspect or facet.

an important part of such supportive work is the
identi   cation of the relevant aspects or facets of
the topic (e.g., the ambience of a restaurant vs. its
food or staff or cleanliness) and the correspondent
sentiment; see (brody and elhadad, 2010; lu et
al., 2011; titov and mcdonald, 2008; jo and oh,
2011; xueke et al., 2013; kim et al., 2013; garc    a-
moya et al., 2013; wang et al., 2011; moghaddam
and ester, 2012). online reviews (about products

or offerings) in id104 and traditional sites
(e.g., yelp, amazon, consumer reports) include
some sort of aspect-oriented star rating systems
where more stars indicate higher level of satisfac-
tion. consumers rely on these user-generated on-
line reviews when making purchase decisions. to
tackle this issue, researchers invent aspect identi   -
cation or target extraction approaches as one sub-
   eld of id31. these approaches    rst
identify    aspects/facets of the principal topic and
then discover authors    corresponding opinions for
each one; e.g., (brody and elhadad, 2010; titov
and mcdonald, 2008). aspects are usually iden-
ti   ed either manually or automatically using word
id91 models (e.g., lda (blei et al., 2003)
or plsa). however, real life is usually a lot more
complex and much harder to break into a series of
facets (e.g., quality of living, marriage, career).

other related work includes opinion summa-
rization, aiming to summary sentiment key points
given long texts (e.g., (hu and liu, 2004; liu et
al., 2005; zhuang et al., 2006; ku et al., 2006)),
opinion spam detection aiming at identifying    c-
titious reviews generated to deceive readers (e.g.,
(ott et al., 2011; li et al., ; li et al., 2013; jin-
dal and liu, 2008; lim et al., 2010)), sentiment
text generation (e.g., (mohammad, 2011; blair-
goldensohn et al., 2008)), and large-scale sen-
timent/mood analysis on social media for trend
detecion (e.g., (o   connor et al., 2010; bollen et
al., 2011; conover et al., 2011; paul and dredze,
2011)).

3 the needs and goals behind

sentiments

as outlined in section 1, this chapter argues that
an adequate and complete account of utilitarian-
based sentiment is possible only with reference to
the goals of the opinion holder. in this section we
discuss a classic model of human needs and asso-
ciated goals and then outline a method for deter-
mining such goals from text.

3.1 maslow   s hierarchy of needs
abraham maslow (maslow, 1943; maslow, 1967;
maslow et al., 1970; maslow, 1972) developed a
theory of the basic human needs as being orga-
nized in a hierarchy of importance, visualized us-
ing a pyramid (shown in figure 1), where needs at
the bottom are the most pressing, basic, and funda-
mental to human life (that is, the human will tend

figure 1: maslow   s hierarchy of needs. fig-
ure borrowed from wikipedia https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/abraham_maslow

to choose to satisfy them    rst before progressing
to needs higher up).

according to maslow   s theory, the most basic

two levels of human needs are1:

    physiological needs: breathing, food, water,

sleep, sex, excretion, etc.

    safety needs: security of body, employment,

property, heath, etc.

which are essential for the physical survival of a
person. once these needs are satis   ed, people tend
to accomplish more and move to higher levels:

    love and belonging: psychological needs

like friendship, family, sexual intimacy.

    esteem: the need to be competent and rec-
ognized such as through status and level of
success like achievement, respect by others,
etc.

these four types of needs are also referred to as
deficit needs (or d-needs), meaning that for
any human, if he or she doesn   t have enough of
any of them, he or she will experience the de-
sire to obtain them. less pressing than the d-
needs are the so-called growth needs, includ-
ing cognitive, aesthetic (need for harmony, or-
der and beauty), and self-actualization (described

1references from

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/abraham_
maslow;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/maslow   s_
hierarchy_of_needs;
http://www.edpsycinteractive.org/topics/
conation/maslow.html

by maslow as    the desire to accomplish every-
thing that one can, to become the most that one
can be   ). growth needs are more generalized, ob-
scure, and computationally challenging. we fo-
cus in this chapter on de   cit needs. for further
reading, refer to maslow   s original papers (1943;
1967) or relevant wikipedia pages.

we note that real life offers many situations in
which an action does not easily align with a need
listed in the hierarchy (for example, the goal of
british troops to arrest an irish republican army
leader or of us troops to attack iraq). addition-
ally, a single action (e.g., going to college, look-
ing for a job) can simultaneously address multiple
needs. putting aside such complex situations in
this chapter, we focus on more tractable situations
to illustrate the key points2.

3.2 finding appropriate goals for actions

and entities

typically, each de   cit need gives rise to one
or more goals that impel the agent (the opinion
holder) to appropriate action. following standard
ai and cognitive science practice, we assume that
the agent instantiates one or more plans to achieve
his or her goals, where a plan is a sequence of
actions intended to alter the state of the world
from some situation (typically, the agent   s initial
state) to a situation in which the goal has been
achieved and the need satis   ed. in each plan, its
actions, their preconditions, and the entities used
in performing them (the plan   s so-called props)
constitute the material upon which sentiment anal-
the goal to sate
ysis operates.
one   s hunger may be achieved by plans such as
visit-restaurant, cook-and-eat-meal-at-home, buy-
or-steal-ready-made-food, cadge-meal-invitation,
etc. in all these plans, food is one of the props.
for the restaurant and buying-food plans, an af-
fordable price is an important precondition.

for example,

a sentiment detection system that seeks to un-
derstand why the holder holds a speci   c opin-
ion valence has to determine the speci   c actions,
preconditions, and props that are relevant to the
holder   s goal, and to what degree they suf   ce. in
principle, a complete account requires the system
to infer from the given text:

2however, putting them aside them doesn   t mean that we
don   t need to explore and explain these complex situations.
on the contrary, these situations are essential and fundamen-
tal to the understanding of opinion and sentiment, but requires
deeper and more systematic exploration in psychology, cog-
nitive science, and ai.

1. what need is active,

2. which goal(s) have been activated to address

the need,

3. which plan(s)

is/are being followed to

achieve the goal(s),

4. which actions, preconditions, and props ap-

pear in these plan(s),

5. which of these is/are being talked about in the

text,

6. how well it/they actually have furthered the

agent   s plan(s),

from which the sentiment valence can be automat-
ically deduced. when the valence is given in the
text, one can work    backwards    to infer step 6, and
possibly even earlier steps.

determining all this is a tall order for compu-
tational systems. fortunately, it is possible to cir-
cumvent much of this reasoning in practice. for
most common situations, a relatively small set of
goals and plans obtains, and the relevant actions,
preconditions, and props are usually quite stan-
dard.
(in fact, they are precisely what is typi-
cally called    facets    in the id31 liter-
ature, for which, as described in section 2, various
techniques have been investigated, albeit without a
clear understanding of the reason these facets are
important.)

given this, the principal unaddressed compu-
tational problem today is the determination from
the text of the original need or goal being expe-
rienced by the holder, since that is what ties to-
gether all the other (and currently investigated) as-
pects. how can one, for a given topic, determine
the goals an agent would typically have for it, sug-
gest likely plans, and potentially pinpoint speci   c
actions, preconditions, and props?

one approach is to perform automated goal
and plan harvesting, using typical id111
/ pattern-matching approaches from information
extraction. this is a relatively mature applica-
tion of nlp (hearst, 1992; riloff, 1997; riloff,
1999; snow, 2005; davidov, 2006; etzioni, 2005;
4; mitchell, 2009; ritter, 2009 titlewhat is this
anyway automatic hypernym discovery bookti-
tleproceedings of the aaai spring symposium on
learning by reading and learning to read; kozareva
and hovy, 2013), and the harvesting power and
behavior of various styles of patterns has been

investigated for over two decades.
(in prac-
tice, the double-anchored pattern (dap) method
(kozareva and hovy, 2013) works better than most
others.) stated simply, one creates or automati-
cally induces text patterns anchored on the topic
(e.g., a camera) such as

   i want a camera because *    
   if i had a camera i could *    
   the main reason to get a camera is *    
   wanted to *, so he bought a camera   
etc.

and then extracts from large amounts of text the
matched vps and nps as being relevant to the
topic. appropriately rephrased and categorized,
one obtains the information harvested by these
patterns would provide typical goals (reasons) for
buying and using cameras.

4 toward a practical computational

approach

we are now ready to describe the overall approach
necessary for a more complete sentiment analy-
sis system. for illustrative purposes we focus on
simple binary (positive/negative) valence identi   -
cation. however, the framework applies to    ner
granularity (e.g., multi-class classi   cation, regres-
sion) with minor adjustments. we    rst provide an
overall algorithm sketch, provide a series of exam-
ples, and then suggest models for determining the
still unexplored aspects required for deeper senti-
ment analysis.

first, we assume that standard techniques are
employed to    nd the following from some given
text:

1. opinion holder: individual or organization

holding the opinion.

2. entity/aspect/theme/facet:

topic or aspect

about which the opinion is held.

3. sentiment indicator: sentiment-related text
(tokens, phrases, sentences, etc.) that indicate
the polarity of the holder.

4. valence: like, neutral, or dislike.

recent topic/facet mining models, and item 3 can
be addressed by existing sentiment related algo-
rithms at the word-, sentence-, or text-level. item
4 at its simplest is a matter of keyword matching,
but the composition witin a sentence of contrasting
valences has generated some interesting researech.
annotated corpora (or other semi-supervised data
harvesting techniques) might be needed for goal
and need identi   cation, as discussed above.

given this, the following sketch algorithm im-

plements deeper id31:

1. in the text, identify the key goal underlying

the theme.

2. is there is no apparent goal?

    if yes,

the opinion is probably non-
utilitarian, so    nd and return a valence
if any, but return no reason for it.

    if no, go to step 3.

3. determine whether the goal is satis   ed:

    if yes, go to step 4,
    if no, return a negative valence.

4. identify the subgoals involved in achieving

the major goal.

5. identify how well the subgoals are satis   ed.
6. determine the    nal utilitarian sentiment
based on the trade-off between different sub-
goals, and return it together with the trade-off
analysis as the reasoning.

this procedure requires the determination of the
goals or subgoals and the condition/situation
under which the opinion holder holds that opin-
ion. the former is discussed above; the latter can
usually bet determined from the context of the
given text.

4.1 examples and illustration
as a running example we use simple restaurant re-
views, sentences in italics indicating original text
from the reviews3:

case 1

1. my friends and i went to restaurant x.

these have been de   ned (or at least used with im-
plicit de   nition) throughout the sentiment litera-
ture, and are de   ned for example in (hovy, 2015).
of these, item 1 is usually achieved by simple
matching.
item 2 can be partially addressed by

2. so many people were waiting there and we

left without eating.

3these reviews were originally from yelp reviews and re-

vised by the authors for illustration purposes.

following the algorithm sketch, the question    was
the major goal of going to a restaurant ful-
   lled?    is answered no. the reviewer is predicted
to hold a negative sentiment. similar reasoning
applies to case 2 in section 1.

case 2

1. my friends and i went to restaurant x.

2. the waiter was friendly and knowledgeable.

3. we ordered curry chicken, potato chips and
italian sausage. the italian sausage was de-
licious.

4. overall the food was appetizing,

5. but i just didn   t enjoy the experience.

to the question    was the major goal of being full
ful   lled?    the answer is yes, as the food was or-
dered and eaten. next the algorithms addresses the
how (manner of achievement) question described
in steps 4   6, which involves the functional ele-
ments of goals/needs embedded in each sentence:

1. my friends and i went to restaurant x.

opinion holder: i
entity/aspect/theme: restaurant x
need: sate hunger
goal: visit restaurant
sentiment indicator: none
valence: neutral condition: in restaurant x

2. the waiter was friendly and knowledgeable.

opinion holder: i
entity/aspect/theme: waiter
need: gather respect/friendship
subgoal: order food
sentiment indicator: friendly, knowledgeable
valence: positive
condition: in restaurant x

3. we ordered curry chicken, potato chips and
italian sausage was deli-

italian sausage.
cious.
opinion holder: i
entity/aspect/theme: italian sausage
need: sate hunger
subgoal: eat food
sentiment indicator: delicious
valence: positive
condition: in restaurant x

4. overall the food was appetizing,

opinion holder: i
entity/aspect/theme: food
need: sate hunger
subgoal: eat enough to remove hunger
sentiment indicator: appetizing
valence: positive
condition: in restaurant x

5. but i just didn   t enjoy the experience.

opinion holder: i
entity/aspect/theme: restaurant visit experi-
ence
need: none     this is not utilitarian
goal: none
sentiment indicator: didn   t enjoy
sentiment label: negative
condition: in restaurant x

the analysis of the needs/goals and their respec-
tive positive and negative valences allows one to
justify the various sentiment statements, and (in
the case of tie    nal negative decision) also indicate
that it is not based on utilitarian considerations.

4.2 a computational model of each part
current computational models can be used to ad-
dress each of the aspects involved in the sketch al-
gorithm. we provide only a high-level description
of each.

deciding functional elements. case 2 above
involves three of the needs described in maslow   s
hierarchy: food, respect/friendship, and emotion.
the    rst two are stated to have been achieved. the
third is a pure emotion, expressed without a rea-
son, why the holder    just didn   t enjoy the experi-
ence   . pure emotions usually have no overt util-
itarian value but only relate to the holder   s high-
level goal of being happy.
in this example, we
have to conclude that since all overt goals were
met, either some unstated utilitarian maslow-type
need was not met, or the holder   s opinion stems
from a deeper psychological/emotional bias, of the
kind mentioned in section 1, that goes beyond util-
itarian value.

whether the major goal
is achieved. to
make a decision about goal achievement, one
must: (1) identify the goal/subgoal of an action
(e.g., buying the detergent, going to a restaurant);
(2) identify whether that goal/subgoal is achieved.
the two steps can be computed either separately

or jointly using current machine learning models
and techniques, including:

    joint model: annotate corpora for satisfac-
tion or not for all goals and subgoals to-
gether, and train a single machine learning al-
gorithm.

    separate model:

1. determine the goal and its plans and
subgoals either through annotation or as
described in section 3.2.

2. associate the actions or entities of
the theme (e.g., going to a restau-
rant; buying a car) with their respective
(sub)goals.

3. align each subgoal with indicator sen-
tence(s) in the document (e.g.,    i got a
small portion   ;    the car was all it was
supposed to be   ).

4. decide whether the subgoal is satis   ed

based on indicator sentence(s).

learning weights for different goals/needs.
one can clearly infer that the customer in case 2
assigns more weight to the emotional aspect, that
being his or her    nal conclusion, and less to the
food or respect/friendship (which comes last in
this scenario). more formally, for a given text d,
we discover l needs/(sub)goals, with indices 1,
2,..., l. each type of need/(sub)goal i     [1, l]
is associated with a weight that contributes to the
   nal sentiment valence decision vi. in document
d, each type of need i is associated with achieve-
ment value ai that indicates how the need or goal
is satis   ed. the sentiment score sd for given doc-
ument d is then given by:

(cid:88)

i   [1,l]

sd =

vi    ai

this simple approach is comparable to a regres-
sion model that assigns weights to relevant as-
pects, where gold standard examples can be the
overall ratings of the labeled restaurant reviews.
one can view such a weight decision procedure
as a supervised regression model by assigning a
weight value to each discovered need. such a
procedure is similar to latent aspect rating intro-
duced in (wang et al., 2011; zhao et al., 2010) by
learning aspect weight (i.e., value, room, location,
or service) for hotel review ratings. a simple il-
lustrative example might be collaborative    ltering

in id126s, e.g.,(breese et al.,
1998; sarwar et al., 2001), optimizing need weight
regarding each respective individual (which could
be sampled from a uniform prior for humans    gen-
erally accepted weights).

since individual expectations can differ,

it
would be advantageous to maintain opinion holder
pro   les (for example, both yelp and amazon keep
individual pro   les for each customer) that record
one   s long-term activity. this would support indi-
vidual analysis of background, personality, or so-
cial identity, and enable learning of speci   c goal
weights for different individuals.

when these issues have been addressed, one can

start asking deeper questions like:

    q: why does john like his current job though

his salary is low?
a: he weighs employment more highly than
family.

    q: how wealthy is a particular opinion

holder?
a: he might be rich as he places little
concern (weight) on money.

or make user-oriented recommendations like:

    q: should the

system recommend an
expensive   but-luxurious hotel or a cheap-
but-poor hotel?

4.3 prior / default knowledge about opinion

holders

sentiment/opinion analysis can be considerably
assisted by the existence of a knowledge base that
provides information about the typical preferences
of the holder.

individuals    goals vary across backgrounds,
ages, nationalities, genders, etc. an engineer
would have different life goals from a business-
man, or a doctor, a citizen living in south america
would have different weighing systems from those
in europe or the united states, people in wartime
would have different life expectations from when
in peacetime. two general methods exist today
for practically collecting such standardized knowl-
edge to construct a relevant knowledge base:

(1) rule-based approaches. hierarchies of per-
sonality pro   les have been proposed, and
changes to them have long been explored in

the social and developmental psychology lit-
erature, usually based on polls or surveys.
for example, (1981) found that children have
higher physical needs than other age groups,
love needs emerging in the transitional period
from childhood to adulthood; esteem needs
are the highest among adolescents; the high-
est self-actualization levels are found with
adults; and the highest levels of security are
found at older ages. as another example,
researchers (tang and ibrahim, 1998; tang
et al., 2002; tang and west, 1997) have
found that survival (i.e., physiological and
safety) needs dominate during wartime while
psychological needs (i.e., love, self-esteem,
and self-actualization) surface during peace-
time, which is in line with our expectations.
for computational implementation, however,
these sorts of studies provide very limited ev-
idence, since only a few aspects are typically
explored.

(2) computational id136 approaches.

despite the lack of information about in-
dividuals,
reasonable preferences can be
inferred from other resources such as online
social media. a vast section of the social
network analysis research focuses on this
problem, as well as much of the research of
the large web search engine companies. net-
working websites like facebook, linkedin,
and google plus provide rich repositories
of personal
individual
attributes such as education, employment,
nationality, religion, likes and dislikes, etc.
additionally, online posts usually offer direct
evidence for such attributes. some examples
include age (rao et al., 2010; rao and
yarowsky, 2010), gender (ciot et al., 2013),
living location (sadilek et al., 2012), and
education (mislove et al., 2010).

information about

5 conclusion and discussion
the past 15 years has witnessed signi   cant perfor-
mance improvements in training machine learn-
ing algorithms for the sentiment/opinion identi   -
cation application. but little progress has been
made toward a deeper understanding about what
opinions or sentiments are, why people hold them,
and why and how their facets are chosen and
expressed. no-one can deny the unprecedented
contributions of statistical learning algorithms in

modern-day (post-1990s) nlp, for this applica-
tion as for others. however, ignoring cognitive
and psychological perspectives in favor of engi-
neering alone inevitably hampers progress once
the algorithms asymptote to their optimal perfor-
mance, since understanding how to do something
doesn   t necessarily lead to better insight about
what needs to be done, or how it is best repre-
sented. for example, when inter-annotator agree-
ment on sentiment labels peaks at 0.79 even for
the rather crude 3-way sentiment granularity of
positive/neutral/negative (ogneva, 2010), is that
the theoretical best that could be achieved? how
could one ever know, without understanding what
other aspects of sentiment/opinion are pertinent
and investigating whether they could constrain the
annotation task and help boost annotation agree-
ment?

in this paper, we described possible directions
for deeper understanding, helping bridge the gap
between psychology / cognitive science and com-
putational approaches. we focus on the opin-
ion holder   s underlying needs and their resultant
goals, which, in a utilitarian model of sentiment,
provides the basis for explaining the reason a sen-
timent valence is held. (the complementary non-
utilitarian, purely intuitive preference-based basis
for some sentiment decisions is a topic requir-
ing altogether different treatment.) while these
thoughts are still immature, scattered, unstruc-
tured, and even imaginary, we believe that these
perspectives might suggest fruitful avenues for
various kinds of future work.

references
m. banko. 2009. ph.d. dissertation, university of

washington.

sasha blair-goldensohn, kerry hannan, ryan mcdon-
ald, tyler neylon, george a reis, and jeff reynar.
2008. building a sentiment summarizer for local
service reviews. in www workshop on nlp in the
information explosion era, volume 14.

david m blei, andrew y ng, and michael i jordan.
2003. id44. the journal of ma-
chine learning research, 3:993   1022.

johan bollen, huina mao, and xiaojun zeng. 2011.
twitter mood predicts the stock market. journal of
computational science, 2(1):1   8.

eric breck, yejin choi, and claire cardie. 2007. iden-
tifying expressions of opinion in context. in ijcai.

john s breese, david heckerman, and carl kadie.
1998. empirical analysis of predictive algorithms
in proceedings of the
for collaborative    ltering.
fourteenth conference on uncertainty in arti   cial
intelligence, pages 43   52. morgan kaufmann pub-
lishers inc.

samuel brody and noemie elhadad. 2010. an unsu-
pervised aspect-sentiment model for online reviews.
in human language technologies: the 2010 an-
nual conference of the north american chapter
of the association for computational linguistics,
pages 804   812. association for computational lin-
guistics.

yejin choi, eric breck, and claire cardie. 2006. joint
extraction of entities and relations for opinion recog-
nition. in emnlp.

morgane ciot, morgan sonderegger, and derek ruths.
2013. gender id136 of twitter users in non-
english contexts. in emnlp, pages 1136   1145.

michael conover, jacob ratkiewicz, matthew fran-
cisco, bruno gonc  alves, filippo menczer, and
alessandro flammini. 2011. political polarization
on twitter. in icwsm.

a. davidov, d. & rappoport. 2006. ef   cient unsuper-
vised discovery of word categories using symmet-
ric patterns and high frequency words. in proceed-
ings of the 21st international conference on com-
putational linguistics coling and the 44th annual
meeting of the acl, pages 297   304.

cafarella m. downey d. popescu a. m. shaked t.
soderland s. et al. etzioni, o. 2005. unsupervised
named-entity extraction from the web: an experi-
mental study. arti   cial intelligence, 165(1):91   134.

lisette garc    a-moya, henry anaya-s  anchez, and
rafael berlanga-llavori. 2013. retrieving product
features and opinions from customer reviews. ieee
intelligent systems, 28(3):0019   27.

barbara l goebel and delores r brown. 1981. age
differences in motivation related to maslow   s need
hierarchy. developmental psychology, 17(6):809.

m. hearst.

1992. automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. in proceedings of
the 14th conference on computational linguistics,
pages 539   545.

eduard h hovy.

2015. what are sentiment, af-
fect, and emotion? applying the methodology of
in language
michael zock to id31.
production, cognition, and the lexicon, pages 13   
24. springer.

minqing hu and bing liu. 2004. mining opinion fea-
tures in customer reviews. in aaai, volume 4, pages
755   760.

ozan irsoy and claire cardie. 2014a. deep recursive
neural networks for compositionality in language.
in advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, pages 2096   2104.

ozan irsoy and claire cardie. 2014b. opinion mining
in proceed-
with deep recurrent neural networks.
ings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing (emnlp), pages
720   728.

wei jin, hung hay ho, and rohini k srihari. 2009.
a novel lexicalized id48-based learning framework
for web opinion mining. in icml.

nitin jindal and bing liu. 2008. opinion spam and
analysis. in proceedings of the 2008 international
conference on web search and data mining, pages
219   230. acm.

yohan jo and alice h oh. 2011. aspect and senti-
ment uni   cation model for online review analysis.
in proceedings of the fourth acm international con-
ference on web search and data mining, pages 815   
824. acm.

richard johansson and alessandro moschitti. 2010.
syntactic and semantic structure for opinion ex-
in proceedings of the four-
pression detection.
teenth conference on computational natural lan-
guage learning.

soo-min kim and eduard hovy. 2004. determin-
in proceedings of
ing the sentiment of opinions.
the 20th international conference on computational
linguistics, page 1367. association for computa-
tional linguistics.

soo-min kim and eduard hovy. 2006. extracting
opinions, opinion holders, and topics expressed in
online news media text. in proceedings of the work-
shop on sentiment and subjectivity in text.

suin kim, jianwen zhang, zheng chen, alice h oh,
2013. a hierarchical aspect-

and shixia liu.
sentiment model for online reviews. in aaai.

z. kozareva and e.h hovy. 2013. tailoring the auto-
mated construction of large-scale taxonomies using
the web. journal of language resources and eval-
uation, 47:859   890.

lun-wei ku, yu-ting liang, and hsin-hsi chen.
2006. opinion extraction, summarization and track-
in aaai spring
ing in news and blog corpora.
symposium: computational approaches to analyz-
ing weblogs, volume 100107.

john lafferty, andrew mccallum, and fernando cn
pereira. 2001. conditional random    elds: prob-
abilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data.

jiwei li and eduard hovy. 2014. id31

on the people   s daily.

jiwei li, myle ott, claire cardie, and eduard hovy.
towards a general rule for identifying deceptive
opinion spam.

proceedings of the third acm international confer-
ence on web search and data mining, pages 251   
260. acm.

jiwei li, myle ott, and claire cardie. 2013.

iden-
tifying manipulated offerings on review portals. in
emnlp, pages 1933   1942.

ee-peng lim, viet-an nguyen, nitin jindal, bing liu,
and hady wirawan lauw. 2010. detecting prod-
uct review spammers using rating behaviors. in pro-
ceedings of the 19th acm international conference
on information and knowledge management, pages
939   948. acm.

yun-zhong liu, ya-ping lin, and zhi-ping chen.
2004. text information extraction based on hid-
den markov model [j]. acta simulata systematica
sinica.

bing liu, minqing hu, and junsheng cheng. 2005.
opinion observer: analyzing and comparing opin-
ions on the web. in proceedings of the 14th interna-
tional conference on world wide web, pages 342   
351. acm.

bing liu. 2010. id31 and subjectivity.
handbook of natural language processing, 2:627   
666.

bing liu. 2012. id31 and opinion min-
ing. synthesis lectures on human language tech-
nologies, 5(1):1   167.

bin lu, myle ott, claire cardie, and benjamin k tsou.
2011. multi-aspect id31 with topic
in data mining workshops (icdmw),
models.
2011 ieee 11th international conference on, pages
81   88. ieee.

andrew l maas, raymond e daly, peter t pham, dan
huang, andrew y ng, and christopher potts. 2011.
learning word vectors for id31.
in
proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the asso-
ciation for computational linguistics: human lan-
guage technologies-volume 1, pages 142   150. as-
sociation for computational linguistics.

abraham harold maslow, robert frager, james fadi-
man, cynthia mcreynolds, and ruth cox. 1970.
motivation and personality, volume 2. harper &
row new york.

abraham harold maslow. 1943. a theory of human

motivation. psychological review, 50(4):370.

abraham h maslow. 1967. a theory of metamotiva-
tion: the biological rooting of the value-life. jour-
nal of humanistic psychology.

abraham h maslow. 1972. the farther reaches of

human nature. maurice bassett.

betteridge j. carlson a. hruschka e. & wang r.
mitchell, t. m.
2009. populating the semantic
in proceed-
web by macro-reading internet text.
ings of the 8th international semantic web confer-
ence (iswc).

samaneh moghaddam and martin ester. 2012. on the
design of lda models for aspect-based opinion min-
ing. in proceedings of the 21st acm international
conference on information and knowledge manage-
ment, pages 803   812. acm.

saif mohammad.

2011.

from once upon a time
to happily ever after: tracking emotions in novels
in proceedings of the 5th acl-
and fairy tales.
hlt workshop on language technology for cul-
tural heritage, social sciences, and humanities,
pages 105   114. association for computational lin-
guistics.

tetsuji nakagawa, kentaro inui, and sadao kurohashi.
2010. dependency tree-based sentiment classi   ca-
in human
tion using crfs with hidden variables.
language technologies: the 2010 annual confer-
ence of the north american chapter of the associa-
tion for computational linguistics, pages 786   794.
association for computational linguistics.

brendan o   connor, ramnath balasubramanyan,
bryan r routledge, and noah a smith.
2010.
from tweets to polls: linking text sentiment to
public opinion time series. icwsm, 11:122   129.

maria ogneva. 2010. how companies can use senti-
ment analysis to improve their business. retrieved
august, 30.

myle ott, yejin choi, claire cardie, and jeffrey t
hancock. 2011. finding deceptive opinion spam
in proceed-
by any stretch of the imagination.
ings of the 49th annual meeting of the association
for computational linguistics: human language
technologies-volume 1, pages 309   319. association
for computational linguistics.

bo pang and lillian lee. 2004. a sentimental educa-
tion: id31 using subjectivity summa-
rization based on minimum cuts. in proceedings of
the 42nd annual meeting on association for compu-
tational linguistics, page 271. association for com-
putational linguistics.

bo pang, lillian lee, and shivakumar vaithyanathan.
2002. thumbs up?: sentiment classi   cation using
machine learning techniques. in proceedings of the
acl-02 conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing-volume 10, pages 79   86. as-
sociation for computational linguistics.

alan mislove, bimal viswanath, krishna p gummadi,
and peter druschel. 2010. you are who you know:
inferring user pro   les in online social networks. in

michael j paul and mark dredze. 2011. you are what
in

you tweet: analyzing twitter for public health.
icwsm, pages 265   272.

guang qiu, bing liu, jiajun bu, and chun chen.
2011. opinion word expansion and target extrac-
tion through double propagation. computational
linguistics, 37(1):9   27.

thomas li-ping tang and w beryl west. 1997. the
importance of human needs during peacetime, retro-
spective peacetime, and the persian gulf war. inter-
national journal of stress management, 4(1):47   62.

delip rao and david yarowsky. 2010. detecting latent
user properties in social media. in proc. of the nips
mlsn workshop.

duyu tang, furu wei, bing qin, li dong, ting liu,
and ming zhou. a joint segmentation and classi   -
cation framework for id31.

delip rao, david yarowsky, abhishek shreevats, and
manaswi gupta. 2010. classifying latent user at-
in proceedings of the 2nd in-
tributes in twitter.
ternational workshop on search and mining user-
generated contents, pages 37   44. acm.

j. riloff, e. & shepherd. 1997. a corpus-based ap-
proach for building semantic lexicons. in proceed-
ings of the second conference on empirical meth-
ods in natural language processing (emnlp), pages
117   124.

r. riloff, e. & jones. 1999. learning dictionaries for
information extraction by multi-level id64.
in proceedings of the sixteenth national conference
on arti   cial intelligence (aaai), pages 474   479.

soderland s. & etzioni o. ritter, a. 2009), title=what
is this, anyway: automatic hypernym discovery,
booktitle=proceedings of the aaai spring sympo-
sium on learning by reading and learning to read.

adam sadilek, henry kautz, and jeffrey p bigham.
2012. finding your friends and following them to
where you are. in proceedings of the    fth acm in-
ternational conference on web search and data min-
ing, pages 723   732. acm.

badrul sarwar, george karypis, joseph konstan, and
john riedl. 2001. item-based collaborative    ltering
recommendation algorithms. in proceedings of the
10th international conference on world wide web,
pages 285   295. acm.

jurafsky d. & ng a.y. snow, r. 2005. learning syn-
tactic patterns for automatic hypernym discovery.
in & l. bottou (eds.) l. k. saul, y. weiss, editor,
advances in neural information processing systems,
volume 17, pages 1297   1304.

benjamin snyder and regina barzilay. 2007. multiple
in

aspect ranking using the good grief algorithm.
hlt-naacl, pages 300   307.

richard socher, alex perelygin, jean y wu, jason
chuang, christopher d manning, andrew y ng,
and christopher potts. 2013. recursive deep mod-
els for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
in proceedings of the conference on
treebank.
empirical methods in natural language processing
(emnlp), volume 1631, page 1642. citeseer.

thomas li-ping tang and abdul h safwat ibrahim.
1998. importance of human needs during retrospec-
tive peacetime and the persian gulf war: mideastern
employees. international journal of stress manage-
ment, 5(1):25   37.

duyu tang, furu wei, bing qin, ming zhou, and ting
liu. building large-scale twitter-speci   c sentiment
lexicon: a representation learning approach.

tlp tang, ahs ibrahim, and wb west. 2002. ef-
fects of war-related stress on the satisfaction of hu-
man needs: the united states and the middle east.
international journal of management theory and
practices, 3(1):35   53.

duyu tang, furu wei, nan yang, ming zhou, ting
2014. learning sentiment-
liu, and bing qin.
speci   c id27 for twitter sentiment clas-
si   cation. in proceedings of the 52nd annual meet-
ing of the association for computational linguis-
tics, pages 1555   1565.

duyu tang. 2015. sentiment-speci   c representation
learning for document-level id31. in
proceedings of the eighth acm international con-
ference on web search and data mining, pages 447   
452. acm.

ivan titov and ryan t mcdonald. 2008. a joint
model of text and aspect ratings for sentiment sum-
marization. in acl, volume 8, pages 308   316. cite-
seer.

sida wang and christopher d manning. 2012. base-
lines and bigrams: simple, good sentiment and topic
in proceedings of the 50th annual
classi   cation.
meeting of the association for computational lin-
guistics: short papers-volume 2, pages 90   94. as-
sociation for computational linguistics.

hongning wang, yue lu, and chengxiang zhai. 2011.
latent aspect rating analysis without aspect key-
word supervision. in proceedings of the 17th acm
sigkdd international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining, pages 618   626. acm.

janyce wiebe, theresa wilson, and claire cardie.
2005. annotating expressions of opinions and emo-
tions in language. language resources and evalua-
tion, 39(2-3):165   210.

xu xueke, cheng xueqi, tan songbo, liu yue, and
shen huawei. 2013. aspect-level opinion min-
ing of online customer reviews. communications,
china, 10(3):25   41.

bishan yang and claire cardie. 2012. extracting opin-
ion expressions with semi-markov conditional ran-
dom    elds. in emnlp.

bishan yang and claire cardie. 2013.

joint infer-
ence for    ne-grained opinion extraction. in acl (1),
pages 1640   1649.

bishan yang and claire cardie. 2014a. context-aware
learning for sentence-level id31 with
posterior id173. in proceedings of acl.

bishan yang and claire cardie. 2014b.

joint mod-
eling of opinion expression extraction and attribute
classi   cation. transactions of the association for
computational linguistics, 2:505   516.

wayne xin zhao, jing jiang, hongfei yan, and xiaom-
ing li. 2010. jointly modeling aspects and opin-
ions with a maxent-lda hybrid. in proceedings of the
2010 conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing, pages 56   65. association for
computational linguistics.

2006.
li zhuang, feng jing, and xiao-yan zhu.
in pro-
movie review mining and summarization.
ceedings of the 15th acm international conference
on information and knowledge management, pages
43   50. acm.

