better document-level id31 from rst discourse parsing   

parminder bhatia and yangfeng ji and jacob eisenstein

school of interactive computing
georgia institute of technology

atlanta, ga 30308

parminder.bhatia243@gmail.com, {jiyfeng,jacobe}@gatech.edu

abstract

discourse structure is the hidden link be-
tween surface features and document-level
properties, such as sentiment polarity. we
show that the discourse analyses produced
by rhetorical structure theory (rst)
parsers can improve document-level senti-
ment analysis, via composition of local in-
formation up the discourse tree. first, we
show that reweighting discourse units ac-
cording to their position in a dependency
representation of the rhetorical structure
can yield substantial
improvements on
lexicon-based id31. next,
we present a id56
over the rst structure, which offers sig-
ni   cant improvements over classi   cation-
based methods.
introduction

1
id31 and opinion mining are among
the most widely-used applications of language
technology, impacting both industry and a vari-
ety of other academic disciplines (feldman, 2013;
liu, 2012; pang and lee, 2008). yet senti-
ment analysis is still dominated by bag-of-words
approaches, and attempts to include additional
linguistic context typically stop at the sentence
level (socher et al., 2013). since document-level
opinion mining inherently involves multi-sentence
texts,
it seems that analysis of document-level
structure should have a role to play.

5
1
0
2

 

p
e
s
1
1

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
9
9
5
1
0

.

9
0
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

a classic example of the potential relevance of
discourse to id31 is shown in fig-
ure 1. in this review of the    lm the last samu-
rai, the positive sentiment words far outnumber
the ::::::::
sentiment words. but the discourse
structure     indicated here with rhetorical struc-
ture theory (rst; mann and thompson, 1988)    
at https://github.com/

negative :::::::::

available

   code

is

parry2403/r2n2

concession
r
1h

justify

conjunction

	
1a

elaboration
	
1b

1c

1d

justify

	
1e conjunction
1g

1f

[it could have been a great movie]1a [it does have
beautiful scenery,]1b [some of the best since lord of
the rings.]1c [the acting is well done,]1d [and i really
liked the son of the leader of the samurai.]1e [he was
hated to see him die.]1g [but,
a likable chap,]1f [and i ::::
other than all that, this movie is ::::::
nothing more than hid-
den :::::

rip-offs.]1h

figure 1: example adapted from voll and taboada
(2007).

clearly favors the    nal sentence, whose polarity
is negative. this example is illustrative in more
than one way: it was originally identi   ed by voll
and taboada (2007), who found that manually-
annotated rst parse trees improved lexicon-
based id31, but that automatically-
generated parses from the spade parser (soricut
and marcu, 2003), which was then state-of-the-art,
did not.

since this time, rst discourse parsing has im-
proved considerably, with the best systems now
yielding 5-10% greater raw accuracy than spade,
depending on the metric. the time is therefore
right to reconsider the effectiveness of rst for
document-level id31.
in this pa-
per, we present two different ways of combin-
ing rst discourse parses with sentiment analy-
sis. the methods are both relatively simple, and

can be used in combination with an    off the shelf   
discourse parser. we consider the following two
architectures:

    reweighting the contribution of each dis-
course unit, based on its position in a
dependency-like representation of the dis-
course structure. such weights can be de-
   ned using a simple function, or learned from
a small of data.

    recursively

propagating

up
through the rst parse, in an architecture in-
spired by id56s (smolen-
sky, 1990; socher et al., 2011).

sentiment

both architectures can be used in combination
with either a lexicon-based sentiment analyzer, or
a trained classi   er. indeed, for users whose start-
ing point is a lexicon-based approach, a simple
rst-based reweighting function can offer signif-
icant improvements. for those who are willing
to train a sentiment classi   er, the recursive model
yields further gains.

2 background

2.1 rhetorical structure theory
rst is a compositional model of discourse struc-
ture, in which elementary discourse units (edus)
are combined intro progressively larger discourse
units, ultimately covering the entire document.
discourse relations may involve a nucleus and a
satellite, or they may be multinuclear. in the ex-
ample in figure 1, the unit 1c is the satellite of
a relationship with its nucleus 1b; together they
form a larger discourse unit, which is involved in
a multinuclear conjunction relation.

the nuclearity structure of rst trees suggests
a natural approach to evaluating the importance
of segments of text:
satellites tend to be less
important, and nucleii tend to be more impor-
tant (marcu, 1999). this idea has been leveraged
extensively in document summarization (gerani
et al., 2014; uz  eda et al., 2010; yoshida et
al., 2014), and was the inspiration for voll and
taboada (2007), who examined intra-sentential re-
lations, eliminating all words except those in the
top-most nucleus within each sentence. more re-
cent work focuses on reweighting each discourse
unit depending on the relations in which it partic-
ipates (heerschop et al., 2011; hogenboom et al.,

2015). we consider such an approach, and com-
pare it with a compositional method, in which sen-
timent polarity is propagated up the discourse tree.
marcu (1997) provides the seminal work on
automatic rst parsing, but there has been a re-
cent spike of interest in this task, with contempo-
rary approaches employing discriminative learn-
ing (hernault et al., 2010), rich features (feng
and hirst, 2012), id170 (joty et al.,
2015), and representation learning (ji and eisen-
stein, 2014; li et al., 2014). with many strong
systems to choose from, we employ the publicly-
available dplp parser (ji and eisenstein, 2014),1.
to our knowledge, this system currently gives the
best f-measure on relation identi   cation, the most
dif   cult subtask of rst parsing. dplp is a shift-
reduce parser (sagae, 2009), and its time complex-
ity is linear in the length of the document.

2.2 id31
there is a huge literature on sentiment analy-
sis (pang and lee, 2008; liu, 2012), with partic-
ular interest in determining the overall sentiment
polarity (positive or negative) of a document. bag-
of-words models are widely used for this task, as
they offer accuracy that is often very competitive
with more complex approaches. given labeled
data, supervised learning can be applied to obtain
sentiment weights for each word. however, the
effectiveness of supervised id31 de-
pends on having training data in the same domain
as the target, and this is not always possible. more-
over, in social science applications, the desired
labels may not correspond directly to positive or
negative sentiment, but may focus on other cat-
egories, such as politeness (danescu-niculescu-
mizil et al., 2013), narrative frames (jurafsky et
al., 2014), or a multidimensional spectrum of emo-
tions (kim et al., 2012). in these cases, labeled
documents may not be available, so users of-
ten employ a simpler method: counting matches
against lists of words associated with each cate-
gory. such lists may be built manually from intro-
spection, as in liwc (tausczik and pennebaker,
2010) and the general inquirer (stone, 1966). al-
ternatively, they may be induced by id64
from a seed set of words (hatzivassiloglou and
mckeown, 1997; taboada et al., 2011). while
lexicon-based methods may be less accurate than
supervised classi   ers, they are easier to apply to

1https://github.com/jiyfeng/dplp

1h

1a

1d

1b

1c

1e

1f

1g

figure 2: dependency-based discourse tree repre-
sentation of the discourse in figure 1

new domains and problem settings. our proposed
approach can be used in combination with either
method for id31, and in principle,
could be directly applied to other document-level
categories, such as politeness.

2.3 datasets
we evaluate on two review datasets. in both cases,
the goal is to correctly classify the opinion po-
larity as positive or negative. the    rst dataset
is comprised of 2000 movie reviews, gathered by
pang and lee (2004). we perform ten-fold cross-
validation on this data. the second dataset is
larger, consisting of 50,000 movie reviews, gath-
ered by socher et al. (2013), with a prede   ned
50/50 split into training and test sets. documents
are scored on a 1-10 scale, and we treat scores
    4 as negative,     7 as positive, and ignore scores
of 5-6 as neutral     although in principle nothing
prevents extension of our approaches to more than
two sentiment classes.

3 discourse depth reweighting

our    rst approach to incorporating discourse in-
formation into id31 is based on
quantifying the importance of each unit of text in
terms of its discourse depth. to do this, we em-
ploy the dependency-based discourse tree (dep-
dt) formulation from prior work on summariza-
tion (hirao et al., 2013). the dep-dt formal-
ism converts the constituent-like rst tree into
a directed graph over elementary discourse units
(edus), in a process that is a close analogue of the
transformation of a headed syntactic constituent
parse to a syntactic dependency graph (k  ubler et
al., 2009).

the dep-dt representation of the discourse in
figure 1 in shown in figure 2. the graph is con-
structed by propagating    head    information up the
rst tree; if the elementary discourse unit ei is the
satellite in a discourse relation headed by ej, then

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

there is an edge from ej to ei. thus, the    depth   
of each edu is the number of times in which it is
embedded in the satellite of a discourse relation.
the exact algorithm for constructing dep-dts is
given by hirao et al. (2013).

given this representation, we construct a simple
linear function for weighting the contribution of
the edu at depth di:

  i = max(0.5, 1     di/6).

(1)
thus, at di = 0, we have   i = 1, and at di     3, we
have   i = 0.5. now assume each elementary dis-
course unit contributes a prediction   i =   (cid:62)wi,
where wi is the bag-of-words vector, and    is a
vector of weights, which may be either learned or
speci   ed by a sentiment lexicon. then the overall
prediction for a document is given by,

   =

  i(  (cid:62)wi) =   (cid:62)(

  iwi).

(2)

i

i

evaluation we apply this approach in combi-
nation with both lexicon-based and classi   cation-
based id31. we use the lexicon of
wilson et al. (2005), and set   j = 1 for words
marked    positive   , and   j =    1 for words marked
negative. for classi   cation-based analysis, we set
   equal to the weights obtained by training a logis-
tic regression classi   er, tuning the id173
coef   cient on held-out data.

results are shown in table 1. as seen in
the comparison between lines b1 and d1, dis-
course depth weighting offers substantial improve-
ments over the bag-of-words approach for lexicon-
based id31, with raw improvements
of 4   5%. given the simplicity of this approach    
which requires only a sentiment lexicon and a dis-
course parser     we strongly recommend the ap-
plication of discourse depth weighting for lexicon-
based id31 at the document level.
however, the improvements for the classi   cation-
based models are considerably smaller, less than
1% in both datasets.

4 rhetorical id56s
discourse-depth reweighting offers signi   cant im-
provements for lexicon-based sentiment analy-
sis, but the improvements over the more accurate
classi   cation-based method are meager. we there-
fore turn to a data-driven approach for combining
id31 with rhetorical structure theory,
based on id56s (socher et al.,

pang & lee socher et al.

baselines
68.3
b1. lexicon
b2. classi   er
82.4
discourse depth weighting
72.6
d1. lexicon
d2. classi   er
82.9
rhetorical id56
r1. no relations
r2. with relations

83.4
84.1

74.9
81.5

78.9
82.0

85.5
85.6

table 1: sentiment classi   cation accuracies on
two movie review datasets (pang and lee, 2004;
socher et al., 2013), described in section 2.3.

2011). the idea is simple: recursively propagate
sentiment scores up the rst tree, until the root of
the document is reached. for nucleus-satellite dis-
course relations, we have:

  i = tanh(k(ri)

n   n(i) + k(ri)

s   s(i)),

(3)

where i indexes a discourse unit composed from
relation ri, n(i) indicates its nucleus, and s(i) in-
dicates its satellite. returning to the example in
figure 1, the sentiment score for the discourse unit
obtained by combining 1b and 1c is obtained
from tanh(k(elaboration)
  1c).
similarly, for multinuclear relations, we have,

  1b + k(elaboration)

n

s

  i = tanh(

k(ri)

n   j).

(4)

(cid:88)

j   n(i)

in the base case, each elementary discourse unit   s
sentiment is constructed from its bag-of-words,
  i =   (cid:62)wi. because the structure of each doc-
ument is different, the network architecture varies
in each example; nonetheless, the parameters can
be reused across all instances.

this approach, which we call a rhetorical re-
cursive neural network (r2n2), is reminiscent of
the compositional model proposed by socher et al.
(2013), where composition is over the constituents
of the syntactic parse of a sentence, rather than
the units of a discourse. however, a crucial differ-
ence is that in r2n2s, the elements    and k are
scalars: we do not attempt to learn a latent dis-
tributed representation of the sub-document units.
this is because discourse units typically comprise
multiple words, so that accurate analysis of the
sentiment for elementary discourse units is not so
dif   cult as accurate analysis of individual words.

the scores for individual discourse units can be
computed from a bag-of-words classi   er, or, in fu-
ture work, from a more complex model such as a
recursive or recurrent neural network.

while this neural network structure captures
the idea of compositionality over the rst tree,
the most deeply embedded discourse units can be
heavily down-weighted by the recursive compo-
sition (assuming ks < kn):
in the most ex-
treme case of a right-branching or left-branching
structure, the recursive operator may be applied n
times to the most deeply embedded edu. in con-
trast, discourse depth reweighting applies a uni-
form weight of 0.5 to all discourse units with depth
    3. in the spirit of this approach, we add an addi-
tional component to the network architecture, cap-
turing the bag-of-words for the entire document.
thus, at the root node we have:

  doc =     (cid:62)(

wi) +   rst-root,

(5)

(cid:88)

i

with   rst-root de   ned recursively from equations 3
and 4,    indicating the vector of per-word weights,
and the scalar    controlling the tradeoff between
these two components.
learning r2n2 is trained by backpropagating
from a hinge loss objective; assuming yt    
{   1, 1} for each document t, we have the loss
lt = (1     yt  doc,t)+.
from this loss, we
use id26 through structure to obtain
gradients on the parameters (goller and kuch-
ler, 1996). training is performed using stochas-
tic id119.
for simplicity, we fol-
low zirn et al. (2011) and focus on the dis-
tinction between contrastive and non-contrastive
relations. the set of contrastive relations in-
cludes contrast, comparison, antithe-
sis, antithesis-e, consequence-s, con-
cession, and problem-solution.
evaluation results for this approach are shown
in lines r1 and r2 of table 1. even without dis-
tinguishing between discourse relations, we get an
improvement of more than 3% accuracy on the
stanford data, and 0.5% on the smaller pang &
lee dataset. adding sensitivity to discourse rela-
tions (distinguishing k(r) for contrastive and non-
contrastive relations) offers further improvements
on the pang & lee data, outperforming the base-
line classi   er (d2) by 1.3%.

the accuracy of discourse relation detection is
only 60% for even the best systems (ji and eisen-

stein, 2014), which may help to explain why re-
lations do not offer a more substantial boost. an
anonymous reviewer recommended evaluating on
gold rst parse trees to determine the extent to
which improvements in rst parsing might trans-
fer to downstream document analysis. such an
evaluation would seem to require a large corpus of
texts with both gold rst parse trees and sentiment
polarity labels; the sfu review corpus (taboada,
2008) of 30 review texts offers a starting point, but
is probably too small to train a competitive senti-
ment analysis system.

5 related work

section 2 mentions some especially relevant prior
work. other efforts to incorporate rst into
id31 have often focused on intra-
sentential discourse relations (heerschop et al.,
2011; zhou et al., 2011; chenlo et al., 2014),
rather than relations over the entire document.
wang et al. (2012) address id31 in
chinese. lacking a discourse parser, they focus
on explicit connectives, using a strategy that is re-
lated to our discourse depth reweighting. wang
and wu (2013) use manually-annotated discourse
parses in combination with a sentiment lexicon,
which is automatically updated based on the dis-
course structure. zirn et al. (2011) use an rst
parser in a markov logic network, with the goal
of making polarity predictions at the sub-sentence
level, rather than improving document-level pre-
diction. none of the prior work considers the sort
of recurrent compositional model presented here.
an alternative to rst is to incorporate    shal-
low    discourse structure, such as the relations
from the penn discourse treebank (pdtb).
pdtb relations were shown to improve sentence-
level id31 by somasundaran et al.
(2009), and were incorporated in a model of sen-
timent    ow by wachsmuth et al. (2014). pdtb
relations are often signaled with explicit discourse
connectives, and these may be used as a fea-
ture (trivedi and eisenstein, 2013; lazaridou et
al., 2013) or as posterior constraints (yang and
cardie, 2014). this prior work on discourse rela-
tions within sentences and between adjacent sen-
tences can be viewed as complementary to our fo-
cus on higher-level discourse relations across the
entire document.

there are unfortunately few possibilities for
direct comparison of our approach against prior

work. heerschop et al. (2011) and wachsmuth et
al. (2014) also employ the pang and lee (2004)
dataset, but neither of their results are directly
comparable: heerschop et al. (2011) exclude doc-
uments that spade fails to parse, and wachsmuth
et al. (2014) evaluates only on individual sentences
rather than entire documents. the only possi-
ble direct comparison is with very recent work
from hogenboom et al. (2015), who employ a
weighting scheme that is similar to the approach
described in section 3. they evaluate on the pang
and lee data, and consider only lexicon-based
id31, obtaining document-level ac-
curacies between 65% (for the baseline) and 72%
(for their best discourse-augmented system). ta-
ble 1 shows that fully supervised methods give
much stronger performance on this dataset, with
accuracies more than 10% higher.

6 conclusion
sentiment polarity analysis has typically relied
on a    preponderance of evidence    strategy, hop-
ing that the words or sentences representing the
overall polarity will outweigh those representing
counterpoints or rhetorical concessions. how-
ever, with the availability of off-the-shelf rst dis-
course parsers, it is now easy to include document-
level structure in id31. we show
that a simple reweighting approach offers robust
advantages in lexicon-based id31,
and that a id56 can substan-
tially outperform a bag-of-words classi   er. future
work will focus on combining models of discourse
structure with richer models at the sentence level.
acknowledgments thanks to the anonymous review-
ers for their helpful suggestions on how to improve the paper.
the following members of the georgia tech computational
linguistics laboratory offered feedback throughout the re-
search process: naman goyal, vinodh krishan, umashanthi
pavalanathan, ana smith, yijie wang, and yi yang. several
class projects in georgia tech cs 4650/7650 took alternative
approaches to the application of discourse parsing to senti-
ment analysis, which was informative to this work; thanks
particularly to julia cochran, rohit pathak, pavan kumar
ramnath, and bharadwaj tanikella. this research was sup-
ported by a google faculty research award, by the national
institutes of health under award number r01gm112697-01,
and by the air force of   ce of scienti   c research. the con-
tent is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the of   cial views of these sponsors.

references
jos  e m chenlo, alexander hogenboom, and david e
losada. 2014. rhetorical structure theory for po-
larity estimation: an experimental study. data &
knowledge engineering.

cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil, moritz sudhof,
dan jurafsky, jure leskovec, and christopher potts.
2013. a computational approach to politeness with
application to social factors. in proceedings of the
association for computational linguistics (acl),
pages 250   259, sophia, bulgaria.

ronen feldman.

techniques and applica-
tions for id31. communications of the
acm, 56(4):82   89.

2013.

vanessa wei feng and graeme hirst. 2012. text-level
discourse parsing with rich linguistic features. in
proceedings of the association for computational
linguistics (acl), jeju, korea.

shima gerani, yashar mehdad, giuseppe carenini,
raymond t ng, and bita nejat. 2014. abstractive
summarization of product reviews using discourse
in proceedings of the association for
structure.
computational linguistics (acl), baltimore, md.

christoph goller and andreas kuchler. 1996. learn-
ing task-dependent distributed representations by
id26 through structure. in neural net-
works, ieee international conference on, pages
347   352. ieee.

vasileios hatzivassiloglou and kathleen r. mckeown.
1997. predicting the semantic orientation of adjec-
tives. in proceedings of the association for compu-
tational linguistics (acl), pages 174   181, madrid,
spain.

bas heerschop, frank goossen, alexander hogen-
boom, flavius frasincar, uzay kaymak, and fran-
ciska de jong. 2011. polarity analysis of texts using
discourse structure. in proceedings of the 20th acm
international conference on information and knowl-
edge management, pages 1061   1070. acm.

hugo hernault, helmut prendinger, david a. duverle,
and mitsuru ishizuka. 2010. hilda: a discourse
parser using support vector machine classi   cation.
dialogue and discourse, 1(3):1   33.

tsutomu hirao, yasuhisa yoshida, masaaki nishino,
norihito yasuda, and masaaki nagata.
2013.
single-document summarization as a tree knapsack
in proceedings of empirical methods
problem.
for natural language processing (emnlp), pages
1515   1520.

alexander hogenboom, flavius frasincar, franciska
de jong, and uzay kaymak. 2015. using rhetorical
structure in id31. communications of
the acm, 58(7):69   77.

yangfeng ji and jacob eisenstein. 2014. represen-
tation learning for text-level discourse parsing.
in
proceedings of the association for computational
linguistics (acl), baltimore, md.

sha   q joty, giuseppe carenini, and raymond ng.
2015. codra: a novel discriminative framework
for rhetorical analysis. computational linguistics,
41(3).

dan jurafsky, victor chahuneau, bryan r routledge,
and noah a smith. 2014. narrative framing of con-
sumer sentiment in online restaurant reviews. first
monday, 19(4).

suin kim, jinyeong bak, and alice haeyun oh. 2012.
do you feel what i feel? social aspects of emotions
in proceedings of the in-
in twitter conversations.
ternational conference on web and social media
(icwsm), menlo park, california. aaai publica-
tions.

sandra k  ubler, ryan mcdonald, and joakim nivre.
2009. id33. synthesis lectures on
human language technologies, 1(1):1   127.

angeliki lazaridou,

ivan titov,

and caroline
sporleder.
2013. a bayesian model for joint
unsupervised induction of sentiment, aspect and
in proceedings of the
discourse representations.
association for computational linguistics (acl),
pages 1630   1639, sophia, bulgaria.

jiwei li, rumeng li, and eduard hovy. 2014. recur-
sive deep models for discourse parsing. in proceed-
ings of empirical methods for natural language
processing (emnlp).

bing liu. 2012. id31 and opinion min-
ing. synthesis lectures on human language tech-
nologies, 5(1):1   167.

william mann. 1984. discourse structures for text
generation. in proceedings of the 10th international
conference on computational linguistics and 22nd
annual meeting on association for computational
linguistics, pages 367   375. association for com-
putational linguistics.

daniel marcu. 1997. the rhetorical parsing of natu-
ral language texts. in proceedings of the european
chapter of the association for computational lin-
guistics (eacl), pages 96   103.

daniel marcu. 1999. the automatic construction of
large-scale corpora for summarization research. in
proceedings of the 22nd annual international acm
sigir conference on research and development in
information retrieval, pages 137   144. acm.

bo pang and lillian lee. 2004. a sentimental edu-
cation: id31 using subjectivity sum-
in proceed-
marization based on minimum cuts.
ings of the association for computational linguis-
tics (acl), pages 271   278.

bo pang and lillian lee. 2008. opinion mining and
id31. foundations and trends in infor-
mation retrieval, 2(1-2):1   135.

kenji sagae.

2009. analysis of discourse struc-
ture with syntactic dependencies and data-driven
in proceedings of the 11th
id132.
international conference on parsing technologies
(iwpt   09), pages 81   84, paris, france, october.
association for computational linguistics.

paul smolensky. 1990. tensor product variable bind-
ing and the representation of symbolic structures
arti   cial intelligence,
in connectionist systems.
46(1):159   216.

richard socher, cliff c. lin, andrew y. ng, and
christopher d. manning. 2011. parsing natural
scenes and natural language with recursive neu-
in proceedings of the international
ral networks.
conference on machine learning (icml), seattle,
wa.

richard socher, alex perelygin, jean y wu, jason
chuang, christopher d manning, andrew y ng,
and christopher potts. 2013. recursive deep mod-
els for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. in proceedings of empirical methods for
natural language processing (emnlp).

swapna somasundaran, galileo namata,

janyce
wiebe, and lise getoor. 2009. supervised and
unsupervised methods in employing discourse rela-
tions for improving opinion polarity classi   cation.
in proceedings of empirical methods for natural
language processing (emnlp), singapore.

radu soricut and daniel marcu.

2003. sentence
level discourse parsing using syntactic and lexical
information. in proceedings of the north american
chapter of the association for computational lin-
guistics (naacl), pages 149   156.

philip j. stone.

the general inquirer: a
computer approach to content analysis. the mit
press.

1966.

maite taboada, julian brooke, milan to   loski, kim-
berly voll, and manfred stede. 2011. lexicon-
based methods for id31. computa-
tional linguistics, 37(2):267   307.

maite taboada.

sfu review cor-
http://www.sfu.ca/  mtaboada/

pus.
research/sfu_review_corpus.html.

2008.

yla r tausczik and james w pennebaker. 2010. the
psychological meaning of words: liwc and com-
journal of lan-
puterized text analysis methods.
guage and social psychology, 29(1):24   54.

rakshit trivedi and jacob eisenstein. 2013. discourse
connectors for latent subjectivity in sentiment anal-
ysis. in proceedings of the north american chap-
ter of the association for computational linguistics
(naacl), pages 808   813, stroudsburg, pennsylva-
nia. association for computational linguistics.

vin    cius

rodrigues uz  eda,

thiago alexan-
dre salgueiro pardo, and maria das grac  as volpe
nunes. 2010. a comprehensive comparative eval-
uation of rst-based summarization methods. acm
transactions on speech and language processing
(tslp), 6(4):4.

kimberly voll and maite taboada.

2007. not all
words are created equal: extracting semantic orien-
tation as a function of adjective relevance. in pro-
ceedings of australian conference on arti   cial in-
telligence.

henning wachsmuth, martin trenkmann, benno stein,
and gregor engels. 2014. modeling review argu-
mentation for robust id31. in proceed-
ings of the international conference on computa-
tional linguistics (coling).

fei wang and yunfang wu. 2013. exploiting hierar-
chical discourse structure for review sentiment anal-
in proceedings of the conference on asian
ysis.
language processing (ialp), pages 121   124.

fei wang, yunfang wu, and likun qiu. 2012. ex-
ploiting discourse relations for id31.
in proceedings of the international conference on
computational linguistics (coling), pages 1311   
1320, mumbai, india.

theresa wilson, janyce wiebe, and paul hoffmann.
2005. recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
in proceedings of em-
level id31.
pirical methods for natural language processing
(emnlp), pages 347   354.

bishan yang and claire cardie. 2014. context-aware
learning for sentence-level id31 with
posterior id173. in proceedings of the as-
sociation for computational linguistics (acl), bal-
timore, md.

yasuhisa yoshida, jun suzuki, tsutomu hirao, and
masaaki nagata. 2014. dependency-based dis-
course parser for single-document summarization.
in proceedings of empirical methods for natural
language processing (emnlp).

lanjun zhou, binyang li, wei gao, zhongyu wei,
and kam-fai wong.
2011. unsupervised dis-
covery of discourse relations for eliminating intra-
in proceedings of
sentence polarity ambiguities.
empirical methods for natural language process-
ing (emnlp), pages 162   171.

c  acilia zirn, mathias niepert, heiner stuckenschmidt,
and michael strube. 2011. fine-grained sentiment
analysis with structural features. in proceedings of
the international joint conference on natural lan-
guage processing (ijcnlp), pages 336   344, chi-
ang mai, thailand.

