winning arguments: interaction dynamics and persuasion

strategies in good-faith online discussions

chenhao tan

vlad niculae

cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil
cornell university

{chenhao|vlad|cristian|llee}@cs.cornell.edu

lillian lee

6
1
0
2

 
b
e
f
6

 

 
 
]
i
s
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
3
0
1
1
0

.

2
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract
changing someone   s opinion is arguably one of the most important
challenges of social interaction. the underlying process proves
dif   cult to study: it is hard to know how someone   s opinions are
formed and whether and how someone   s views shift. fortunately,
changemyview, an active community on reddit, provides a plat-
form where users present their own opinions and reasoning, invite
others to contest them, and acknowledge when the ensuing discus-
sions change their original views.
in this work, we study these
interactions to understand the mechanisms behind persuasion.

we    nd that persuasive arguments are characterized by interest-
ing patterns of interaction dynamics, such as participant entry-order
and degree of back-and-forth exchange. furthermore, by compar-
ing similar counterarguments to the same opinion, we show that
language factors play an essential role. in particular, the interplay
between the language of the opinion holder and that of the coun-
terargument provides highly predictive cues of persuasiveness. fi-
nally, since even in this favorable setting people may not be per-
suaded, we investigate the problem of determining whether some-
one   s opinion is susceptible to being changed at all. for this more
dif   cult task, we show that stylistic choices in how the opinion is
expressed carry predictive power.

1.

introduction

changing a person   s opinion is a common goal in many settings,
ranging from political or marketing campaigns to friendly or pro-
fessional conversations. the importance of this topic has long been
acknowledged, leading to a tremendous amount of research effort
[9, 15, 17, 42, 46, 47]. thanks to the increasing number of social
interactions online, interpersonal persuasion has become observ-
able at a massive scale [19]. this allows the study of interactive
persuasion in practice, without elicitation, thus bypassing some
limitations of laboratory experiments and leading to new research
questions regarding dynamics in real discussions. at the same time,
the lack of the degree of experimental control offered by lab trials
raises new methodological challenges that we address in this work.
it is well-recognized that multiple factors are at play in persua-
sion. beyond (i) the characteristics of the arguments themselves,

copyright is held by the international world wide web conference com-
mittee (iw3c2). iw3c2 reserves the right to provide a hyperlink to the
author   s site if the material is used in electronic media.
www 2016, april 11   15, 2016, montr  al, qu  bec, canada.
acm 978-1-4503-4143-1/16/04.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2872427.2883081.

such as intensity, valence and framing [1, 2, 4, 6, 23], and (ii) so-
cial aspects, such as social proof and authority [7, 10, 33], there is
also (iii) the relationship between the opinion holder and her belief,
such as her certainty in it and its importance to her [44, 45, 54, 59].
thus, an ideal setting for the study of persuasion would allow ac-
cess to the reasoning behind people   s views in addition to the full
interactions. furthermore, the outcome of persuasion efforts (e.g.,
which efforts succeed) should be easy to extract.1

one forum satisfying these desiderata is the active reddit sub-
community /r/changemyview (henceforth cmv).2 in contrast
to general platforms such as twitter and facebook, cmv requires
posters to state the reasoning behind their beliefs and to reward
successful arguments with explicit con   rmation. moreover, dis-
cussion quality is monitored by moderators, and posters commit
to an openness to changing their minds. the resulting conversa-
tions are of reasonably high quality, as demonstrated by figure 1,
showing the top portion of a discussion tree (an original post and
all the replies to it) about legalizing the    tontine   .3 in the    gure,
reply b.1 branches off to an extended back-and-forth between the
blue original poster (op) and the orange user; as it turns out, nei-
ther ends up yielding, although both remain polite. reply a.1, on
the other hand, is successful, as the op acknowledges at a.2. the
example suggests that content and phrasing play an important role
(a.1 does well on both counts), but also that interaction factors may
also correlate with persuasion success. examples include time of
entry relative to others and amount of engagement: the discussion
at b.1 started earlier than that at a.1 and went on for longer.
outline and highlight reel. this work provides three different per-
spectives on the mechanics of persuasion. first, we explore how
interaction dynamics are associated with a successful change of
someone   s opinion (  3). we    nd (example above to the contrary)
that a challenger that enters the fray before another tends to have
a higher likelihood of changing the op   s opinion; this holds even
for    rst-time cmv challengers, and so is not a trivial consequence
of more experienced disputants contriving to strike    rst. although
engaging the op in some back-and-forth is correlated with higher
chances of success, we do not see much op conversion in extended
conversations. as for opinion conversion rates, we    nd that the
more participants there are in the effort to persuade the op, the
larger the likelihood of the op changing her view; but, interest-
ingly, the relationship is sublinear.
1 one might think that the outcome is trivially    no one ever changes
their mind   , since people can be amazingly resistant to evidence
contravening their beliefs [8, 32, 36]. but take heart, change does
occur, as we shall show.
2https://reddit.com/r/changemyview
3 it is not necessary for the reader to be familiar with tontines, but a
brief summary is: a pool of money is maintained where the annual
payouts are divided evenly among all participants still living.

figure 1: a fragment of a    typical    /r/changemyview discussion tree   typical in the sense that the full discussion tree has an av-
erage number of replies (54), although we abbreviate or omit many of them for compactness and readability. colors indicate distinct
users. of the 17 replies shown (in our terminology, every node except the original post is a reply), the op explicitly acknowledged only
one as having changed their view:
(the full discussion
tree is available at https://www.reddit.com/r/changemyview/comments/3mzc6u/cmv_the_tontine_should_be_
legalized_and_made_a/.)

the starred reply a.1. the explicit signal is the           character in reply a.2.

besides interaction dynamics, language is a powerful tool that is
in the full control of the challengers. in   4 we explore this perspec-
tive by tackling the task of predicting which of two similar coun-
terarguments will succeed in changing the same view. by com-
paring similar arguments we focus on the role of stylistic choices
in the presentation of an argument (identifying reasoning strate-
gies is a separate problem we do not address). we experiment with
style features based solely on the counterargument, as well as with
features re   ecting the interplay between the counterargument and
the way in which the view is expressed. style features and inter-
play features both prove useful and outperform a strong baseline
that uses bag-of-words. in particular, interplay features alone have
strong predictive power, achieving an improvement of almost 5%
in accuracy over the baseline method (65.1% vs 59.6%) in a com-
pletely fresh heldout dataset. our results also show that it is useful
to include links as evidence   an interesting contrast to studies of
the back   re effect:    when your deepest convictions are challenged
by contradictory evidence, your beliefs get stronger    [8, 32, 36].
however, it hurts to be too intense in the counterargument. the
feature with the most predictive power of successful persuasion is
the dissimilarity with the original post in word usage, while exist-
ing theories mostly study matching in terms of attitude functions or
subject self-discrepancy [43, 56].

in the majority of cases, however, opinions are not changed, even
though it takes courage and self-motivation for the original poster
to post on cmv and invite other people to change her opinion. can
we tell whether the op is unlikely to be persuaded from the way she
presents her reasoning? in   5, we turn to this challenging task. in
our pilot study, humans found this task quite dif   cult in a paired set-
ting and performed no better than random guessing. while we can
outperform the random baseline in a realistic imbalanced setting,
the auc score is only 0.54. our feature analysis is consistent with

existing theories on self-af   rmation [11, 12] and shows that mal-
leable beliefs are expressed using more self-con   dence and more
organization, in a less intense way.

while we believe that the observations we make are useful for
understanding persuasion, we do not claim that any of them have
causal explanations.

in   6, we discuss other observations that may open up future di-
rections, including attempts to capture higher-level linguistic prop-
erties (e.g., semantics and argument structure);   7 summarizes ad-
ditional related work and   8 concludes.

2. dataset

we draw our data from the /r/changemyview subreddit (cmv),

which has over 211,000 subscribers to date. it is self-described4 as
   dedicated to the civil discourse [sic] of opinions   . cmv is well-
suited to our purposes because of its setup and mechanics, the high
quality of its arguments, and the size and activity of its user base.
we elaborate below.

the mechanics of the site are as follows. users that    accept that
they may be wrong or want help changing their view    submit orig-
inal posts, and readers are invited to argue for the other side. the
original posters (ops) explicitly recognize arguments that succeed
in changing their view by replying with the delta (   ) character
(an example is node a.2 in figure 1) and including    an explana-
tion as to why and how    their view changed. a reddit bot called
the deltabot con   rms deltas (an example is a.3 in figure 1) and
maintains a leaderboard of per-user     counts.5 the experimental

4quotations here are from the cmv wiki.
5although non-ops can also issue deltas, in this work, we only
count deltas given by a user in their op role. a consequence is that
we only consider discussion trees where the op   s reddit account

(op) title: i believe that you should be allowed to drive at whatever speed you wish as long as you aren   t driving recklessly or under extenuating
circumstances cmv.
i think that if you feel comfortable driving 80 mph or 40 mph you should be allowed to do so, as long as you aren   t in a school or work zone, etc. because
there are a lot more risks in those areas. i think when you   re comfortable driving you will be a better driver, and if you aren   t worrying about the speed
limit or cops you are going to be more comfortable. however, i think that you should only be allowed to drive at whatever speed you wish as long as you
aren   t driving recklessly. if you   re weaving in and out of traf   c at 90, you probably shouldn   t be allowed to go 90, but if you just stay in the fast lane and
pass the occasional person i don   t think there is a problem. cmv.

(c1) some issues with this:

   

1. who   s to say what is reckless driving? where do you draw the line?
speed is the standard that ensures we know what is considered to be
reckless. the idea of driving any speed you want creates a totally
subjective law.

2. how do you judge whether to pass other drives and such? there are a
lot of spatial awareness issues with the roads being so unpredictable.
3. how do you expect insurance and courts to work out who   s at fault for

an accident?

a:    yeah this guy was going 100 mph!   
b:    but i wasn   t driving recklessly - you were!   
it   s simply not realistic and creates some serious legal issues.

   

(c2) they   re many issues i have with this idea but i   ll start with the most
pressing one. think of the amount of drivers you pass by every day. imagine
all of them going at whatever speed they choose. how would this work? you
cannot have a driver going 35 and a driver who wants to go 65 in the same
lane.
now lets take this onto the highway and you can see how horri   c this could
get quickly. they   re too many drivers out on the road for everyone to choose
there own speed.
speed limits protect us all because it gives us a reasonable expectation in
whatever area we   re driving in. have you ever been on the highway being
a driver going 40mph? if you   re doing the speed limit (65) you catch up to
them so fast you barely have time to react before an accident occurs. you
aren   t expecting this low speed when everyone is going at similar speeds to
yours.
drivers need to know the speed expectations so they can drive and react
accordingly. if everyone goes at whatever speed they want it will only cause
many many accidents.

figure 2: an original post and a pair of root replies c1 and c2 contesting it, where c1 and c2 have relatively high vocabulary overlap with
each other, but only one changed the op   s opinion. (  4 reveals which one.)

advantages of this setup include:
(1) multiple users make different attempts at changing the same
person   s mind on the same issue based on the same rationale, thus
controlling for a number of variables but providing variation along
other important aspects. figure 2, for example, presents in full two
counter-arguments, c1 and c2. they both respond to the same
claims, but differ in style, structure, tone, and other respects.
(2) the deltas serve as explicit persuasion labels that are (2a) pro-
vided by the actual participants and (2b) at the    ne-grained level of
individual arguments, as opposed to mere indications that the op   s
view was changed.
(3) the op has, in principle, expressed an openness to other points
of view, so that we might hope to extract a suf   cient number of
view-changing examples.
these advantages are not jointly exhibited by other debate sites,
such as createdebate.com, forandagainst.com, or debate.org.

the high quality of argumentation makes cmv a model site for
seeing whether opinion shifts can at least occur under favorable
conditions. moderators enforce cmv rules, making sure that ops
explain why they hold their beliefs and do so at reasonable length
(500 characters or more), and that ops engage in conversation with
challengers in a timely fashion. other rules apply to those who
contest the original post. there are rules intended to prevent    low
effort    posts, such as    posts that are only a single link with no
substantial argumentation   , but    length/conciseness isn   t the de-
termining [criterion]. adequate on-topic information is.   6 figure 2

had not been deleted   i.e., the original post is not attributed to the
ambiguous name    [deleted]       at the time of crawl.
6it is worth noting that, as in many online communities, not all
these rules were in place at the site   s creation.
it is a separate
and interesting research question to understand what effects these
rules have and why they were put in place. the currently en-
forced set of rules is available at https://www.reddit.com/
r/changemyview/wiki/rules.

table 1: dataset statistics. the disjoint training and test date ranges
are 2013/01/01   2015/05/07 and 2015/05/08   2015/09/01.

# discussion trees
18,363
2,263

# nodes
1,114,533
145,733

# ops
12,351
1,823

# uniq. participants
69,965
16,923

training
heldout

shows an example where indeed, the op described their point in
reasonable detail, and the responders raised sensible objections.

the high amount of activity on cmv means that we can extract a
large amount of data. we process all discussion trees created at any
time from january 2013, when the subreddit was created, to au-
gust 2015, saving roughly the    nal 4 months (may   august 2015)
for held-out evaluation. some size statistics are given in table 1.
monthly trends are depicted in figure 3:7 after the initial startup,
activity levels stabilize to a healthy, stable growth in average num-
ber of replies and challengers, as, gratifyingly, do op conversion
rates, computed as the fraction of discussion trees wherein the op
awarded a     (figure 3d). for posts where the op gave at least one
delta, the op gave 1.5 deltas on average. this dataset is available at
https://chenhaot.com/pages/changemyview.html.

3.

interaction dynamics

changing someone   s opinion is a complex process, often involv-
ing repeated interactions between the participants. in this section
we investigate the relation between the underlying dynamics and
the chances of    success   , where    success    can be seen from the
perspective of the challenger (did she succeed in changing the op   s
opinion?), as well as from that of the set of challengers (did anyone
change the op   s view?).

7we omit the    rst month as the deltabot may not have been set up.

(a) number of posts per month.

(b) average no. replies per post.

(a) delta ratio vs. entry order.

(b) delta ratio vs. degree of back-
and-forth exchanges.

figure 4: figure 4a shows the ratio of a person eventually winning
a delta in a post with at least 10 challengers depending on the order
of her/his entry. early entry is more likely to win a delta. figure 4b
presents the id203 of winning a delta given the number of
comments by a challenger in a back-and-forth path with op. with
6 or more replies in a back-and-forth path, no challengers managed
to win a delta among our 129 data points (with 5 replies, the success
ratio is 1 out of 3k). in both    gures, error bars represent standard
errors (sometimes 0).

attract attempts by 10 unique challengers, the    rst two challengers
are 3 times more likely to succeed as the 10th (figure 4a).

one potential explanation for this    nding is that dedicated expert
users are more likely to be more active on the site and thus see posts
   rst. to account for this, we redo the analysis only for users that
are participating for the    rst time on cmv. we observe that even
after controlling for user experience, an earlier entry time is still
more favorable. we omit the    gure for space reasons.
back-and-forth. after entering a discussion, the challenger can ei-
ther spend more effort and engage with the op in a back-and-forth
type of interaction or call it quits. figure 4b shows the relation
between the likelihood of receiving a     and degree of back-and-
forth, de   ned as the number of replies the root challenger made in
a path involving only her and the op.9 we observe a non-monotonic
relation between back-and-forth engagement and likelihood of suc-
cess: perhaps while some engagement signals the interest of the op,
too much engagement can indicate futile insistence; in fact, after 5
rounds of back-and-forth the challenger has virtually no chance of
receiving a    .
3.2 op   s conversion

from the perspective of an original post, conversion can happen
when any of the challengers participating in the discussion suc-
ceeds in changing the op   s view. we now turn to exploring how
an op   s conversion relates to the volume and type of activity her
original post attracts.
number of participants. it is reasonable to expect that an op   s
conversion is tied to the number of challengers [7, 10]. for in-
stance, the op might be persuaded by observing the sheer number
of people arguing against her original opinion. moreover, a large
number of challengers will translate into a more diverse set of ar-
guments, and thus higher likelihood that the op will encounter the
ones that best    t her situation. indeed, figure 5a shows that the
likelihood of conversion does increase with the number of unique

9if a subtree won a    , we only consider the winning path; other-
wise, other conversations would be mistakenly labeled unsuccess-
ful. for instance, the path a.1, a.2, a.4, a.5 in figure 1 is not
considered.

(c) average no. challengers per post.

(d) average delta percentage.

figure 3: monthly activity over all full months represented in the
training set. the delta percentage is the fraction of discussion trees
in which the op awarded a delta.

in order to discuss the relation between interaction dynamics and
success, we now introduce corresponding terminology using the
example illustrated in figure 1:

    an original statement of views (original post) together with

all the replies form a discussion tree.

    a direct reply to an original post is called a root reply (a.1
and b.1 in figure 1). the author of a root reply is a root
challenger.

    a subtree includes a root reply and all its children (b.1   b.12

form one of the two subtrees in figure 1).

    a path constitutes all nodes from root reply to a leaf node.
figure 1 contains four paths: p1: a.1, p2: a.1, a.2, a.4,
a.5, p3: b.1   b.11 and p4: b.1, b.12. note that when a    
is awarded, the deltabot automatic reply (a.3) and the op   s
post that triggers it (a.2) are not considered part of the path.

in order to focus on discussions with non-trivial activity, in this
section we only consider discussion trees with at least 10 replies
from challengers and at least one reply from the op.
3.1 challenger   s success

a challenger is successful if she manages to change the view
of the op and receive a    . we now examine how the interaction
patterns in a discussion tree relate to a challenger   s success.
entry time. how does the time when a challenger enters a dis-
cussion relate to her chances of success? a late entry might give
the challenger time to read attempts by other challengers and bet-
ter formulate their arguments, while an early entry might give her
the    rst-mover advantage.8 even for original posts that eventually

8note that although reply display order is affected by upvotes, en-
try time is an important factor when the op follows the post closely.

201302201306201310201402201406201410201502201504020040060080010001200#posts201302201306201310201402201406201410201502201504304050607080average#replies201302201306201310201402201406201410201502201504101520253035average#challengers20130220130620131020140220140620141020150220150420%30%40%deltapercentage0246810challengerrankintime1%2%3%4%5%deltapercentage123456+#repliesinaback-and-forthpath0%1%2%3%4%5%6%deltapercentagechallenger   s opening argument in a rooted path-unit, and full path,
which considers the text in all replies within a rooted path-unit.

in response to the same original post, there are many possible
ways to change someone   s view. we aim to    nd linguistic factors
that can help one formulate her/his argument, rather than to analyze
reasoning strategies.10 hence, for each rooted path-unit that wins
a    , we    nd the rooted path-unit in the same discussion tree that
did not win a     but was the most    similar    in topic. we measure
similarity between rooted path-units based on jaccard similarity in
the root replies after removing stopwords (as de   ned by mallet   s
dictionary [31]).

jaccard(a, b) =

|a     b|
|a     b| ,

where a, b are the sets of words in the    rst reply of each of the two
rooted path-units. this leads to a balanced binary prediction task:
which of the two lexically similar rooted path-units is the successful
one? with this setup, we attempt to roughly de-emphasize what is
being said, in favor of how it is expressed.

we further avoid trivial cases, such as replies that are not argu-
ments but clarifying questions, by removing cases where the root
reply has fewer than 50 words. in order to make sure that there are
enough counterarguments that the op saw, motivated by the results
in   3.2, we also require that there are at least 10 challengers in the
discussion tree and at least 3 unsuccessful rooted path-units before
the last reply that the op made in the discussion tree.

in an ideal world, we would control for both length [13] and
topic [25, 52], but we don   t have the luxury of having enough data
to do so.
in our pilot experiments, annotators    nd that jaccard-
controlled pairs are easier to compare than length-matched pairs, as
the lexical control is likely to produce arguments that make similar
claims. since length can be predictive (for instance, c2 won a
    in figure 2), this raises the concern of false positive    ndings.
hence we develop a post-mortem    dissection    task (labelled root
truncated) in which we only consider the root reply and truncate
the longer one within a pair so that both root replies have the same
number of words. this forcefully removes all length effects.
disclaimer: features that lose predictive power in the root trun-
cated setting (or    reverse direction   11) are not necessarily false
positives (or non-signi   cant), as truncation can remove signi   cant
fractions of the text and lead to different distributions in the re-
sultant dataset. our point, though, is: if features retain predictive
power even in the root truncated settings, they must be indicative
beyond length.

we extract pairs from the training and heldout periods respec-
tively as training data (3,456 pairs) and heldout testing data (807
pairs). given that our focus is on language, we only use text-based
features in this section.12 in preprocessing, we remove explicit ed-
its that users made after posting or commenting, and convert quo-
tations and urls into special tokens.
4.2 features

in order to capture characteristics of successful arguments, we
explore two classes of textual features: (  4.2.1) features that de-
scribe the interplay between a particular challenger   s replies and the
original post, and (  4.2.2) features that are solely based on his/her

10that is an intriguing problem for future work that requires a
knowledge base and sophisticated semantic understanding of lan-
guage.
11e.g., more of feature f is signi   cantly better for root reply, but
less f is signi   cantly better in root truncated.
12an entry order baseline only achieves 54.3% training accuracy.

(a) delta percentage vs. number of
unique challengers.

single-challenger
subtree
(b)
vs.
multiple-challenger subtree
controlled by the number of replies.

figure 5: id203 that a submitted view will be changed, given
(a) the total number of unique challengers binned using log2, and
(b) the number of replies in a subtree.

challengers. notably, we observe a saturation in how much value
each new challenger adds beyond a certain point.
sheer number of challengers or diversity of counterarguments?
to distinguish between the two possible explanations proposed in
the previous paragraph, we control for the diversity of counterargu-
ments by focusing only on subtrees, in which challengers generally
focus on the same argument. to make a fair comparison, we fur-
ther control the number of total replies in the subtree. in light of
figure 4b, we only consider subtrees with between 2 and 4 replies.
figure 5b shows that single-challenger subtrees consistently out-
perform multiple-challenger subtrees in terms of conversion rate.
this observation suggests that the sheer number of challengers is
not necessarily associated with higher chances of conversion. the
fact that multiple-challenger subtrees are less effective might sug-
gest that when talking about the same counterargument, challengers
might not be adding value to it, or they might even disagree (e.g.,
b.12 vs. b.2 in figure 1); alternatively, root replies that attract mul-
tiple challengers might be less effective to begin with.

4. language indicators

of persuasive arguments

the interaction dynamics studied in the previous section are to a
large extent outside the challenger   s in   uence. the language used
in arguing, however, is under one   s complete control; linguistic cor-
relates of successful persuasion can therefore prove of practical
value to aspiring persuaders. in order to understand what factors
of language are effective, we set up paired prediction tasks to ex-
plore the effectiveness of textual discussion features, in the context
of cmv.
4.1 problem setup

in order to study an individual   s success in persuasion, we con-
sider the collection of arguments from the same person in the same
line of argument. we focus on arguments from root challengers
since the root reply is what initiates a line of argument and deter-
mines whether the op will choose to engage. we de   ne all replies
in a path by the root challenger as a rooted path-unit, e.g., reply
a.1 and b.1 in figure 1.

as shown in   3, situations where there is more than one reply
in a rooted path-unit correspond to a higher chance that the op
will be persuaded. so, while the challenger   s opening argument
should be important, statements made later in the rooted path-unit
could be more important. to distinguish these two cases, we con-
sider two related prediction tasks: root reply, which only uses the

183264128256#challengers5%10%15%20%25%30%35%40%45%50%deltapercentageavg#challengersavgdelta%234#replies3%4%5%6%7%8%deltapercentagesinglemultipletable 2: signi   cance tests on interplay features. features are sorted
by average p-value in the two tasks. in all feature testing tables, the
number of arrows indicates the level of p-value, while the direction
shows the relative relationship between positive instances and neg-
ative instances,             : p < 0.0001,          : p < 0.001,       : p < 0.01,
   : p < 0.05. t in the root reply column indicates that the feature
is also signi   cant in the root truncated condition, while t r means
that it is signi   cant in root truncated but the direction is reversed.

feature name
reply frac. in all
reply frac. in content
op frac. in stopwords
#common in stopwords
reply frac. in stopwords
op frac. in all
#common in all
jaccard in content
jaccard in stopwords
#common in content
op frac. in content
jaccard in all

root reply
             (t )
             (t )
             (t r)
             (t r)
            
             (t r)
             (t r)
             (t )
             (t r)
             (t r)
   
(t r)
   
(t )

full path
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            

interplay with the original post: table 2

replies. we present those features that are statistically signi   cant in
the training data under the paired t-test with bonferroni correction
for multiple comparisons.
4.2.1
the context established by the op   s statement of her view can
provide valuable information in judging the relative quality of a
challenger   s arguments. we capture the interplay between argu-
ments and original posts through similarity metrics based on word
overlap.13 we consider four variants based on the number of unique
words in common between the argument (a) and the original post
(o):

|a   o|

    number of common words: |a     o|,
    reply fraction:
    op fraction:
    jaccard:

|o|
|a   o|
|a   o| .

|a|
|a   o|

,

,

table 3: argument-only features that pass a bonferroni-corrected
signi   cance test. features are sorted within each group by average
p-value over the two tasks. due to our simple truncation based on
words, some features, such as those based on complete sentences,
cannot be extracted in root truncated; these are indicated by a dash.
we remind the reader of the root truncated disclaimer from   4.

feature name
#words
word category   based features
#de   nite articles
#inde   nite articles
#positive words
#2nd person pronoun
#links
#negative words
#hedges
#1st person pronouns
#1st person plural pronoun
#.com links
frac. links
frac. .com links
#examples
frac. de   nite articles
#question marks
#pdf links
#.edu links
frac. positive words
frac. question marks
#quotations
word score   based features
arousal
valence
entire argument features
word id178
#sentences
type-token ratio
#paragraphs
flesch-kincaid grade levels
markdown formatting
#italics
bullet list
#bolds
numbered words
frac. italics

root reply
            

full path
            

            
            
             (t r)
            
             (t )
            
            
            
            
             (t )
             (t )
             (t )
   
   
(t )
       
   
   

   

   
   

(t )

            
                
             (t r)
                
   

                
                
          
   
       

            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
      
            
         
   
   
            

         

            
            
            
            
         

            
            
            
            
   

while stopwords may be related to how challengers coordinate
their style with the op [14, 35], content words can be a good signal
of new information or new perspectives. thus, inspired by previous
results distinguishing these vocabulary types in studying the effect
of phrasing [52], for each of the four variants above we try three
different word sets: stopwords, content words and all words.

the features based on interplay are all signi   cant to a certain
degree. similar patterns occur in root reply and full path: in num-
ber of common words and op fraction, persuasive arguments have
larger values because they tend to be longer, as will be shown in
  4.2.2; in reply fraction and jaccard, which are normalized by re-
ply length, persuasive arguments are more dissimilar from the orig-
inal post in content words but more similar in stopwords. keeping
in mind that the pairs we compare are chosen to be similar to each
other, our analysis indicates that, under this constraint, persuasive
arguments use a more different wording from the original post in
content, while at the same time matching them more on stopwords.
13we also tried tf-idf, topical, and id27   based similarity
in cross validation on training data. we defer discussion of poten-
tially useful features to   6.

if we instead use truncation to (arti   cially) control for reply length,

persuasive arguments present lower similarity in all metrics, sug-
gesting that effects might differ over local parts of the texts. how-
ever, it is consistent that successful arguments are less similar to
the original post in content words.

4.2.2 argument-only features: table 3
we now describe cues that can be extracted solely from the replies.
these features attempt to capture linguistic style and its connec-
tions to persuasion success.
number of words. a straightforward but powerful feature is the
number of words. in both root reply and full path, a larger number
of words is strongly correlated with success. this is not surpris-
ing: longer replies can be more explicit [37, 38] and convey more
information. but na  vely making a communication longer does not
automatically make it more convincing (indeed, sometimes, more
succinct phrasing carries more punch); our more advanced features
attempt to capture the subtler aspects of length.

(a) arousal in root replies.

(b) concreteness in root replies.

(c) dominance in root replies.

(d) valence in root replies.

(e) arousal in original posts.

(f) concreteness in original posts.

(g) dominance in original posts.

(h) valence in original posts.

figure 6: style features in different quarters. the    rst row shows how arousal, concreteness, dominance and valence change in different
quarters of the root reply, while the second row shows the same features in the original posts. the descending concreteness trend suggests
that opinions tend to be expressed in a particular-to-general way; replies notably differ by having both the opening and the closing be abstract,
with a concrete middle. these differences are indicative of the functions that the two forms of utterances serve: a cmv rule is that original
posts should not be    like a persuasive essay   . error bars represent standard errors.

word category   based features. as suggested by existing psy-
chology theories and our intuitions, the frequency of certain types
of words may be associated with persuasion success. we consider
a wide range of categories (see   9 for details), where for each,
we measure the raw number of word occurrences and the length-
normalized version.
word score   based features. beyond word categories, we employ
four scalar word-level attributes [5, 57]:

    arousal captures the intensity of an emotion, and ranges from
   calm    words (librarian, dull) to words that excite, like ter-
rorism and erection.

    concreteness re   ects the degree to which a word denotes
something perceptible, as opposed to abstract words which
can denote ideas and concepts, e.g., hamburger vs. justice.
    dominance measures the degree of control expressed by a
word. low-dominance words can suggest vulnerability and
weakness (dementia, earthquake) while high-dominance words
evoke power and success (completion, smile).

    valence is a measure of how pleasant the word   s denotation
is. low-valence words include leukemia and murder, while
sunshine and lovable are high-valence.

we scale the four measures above to lie in [0, 1].14 we extend these
measures to texts by averaging over the ratings of all content words.
table 3 shows that it is consistently good to use calmer language.
aligned with our    ndings in terms of sentiment words (  9), per-
suasive arguments are slightly less happy. however, no signi   cant
differences were found for concreteness and dominance.
14while the resources cover most common words, out-of-
vocabulary misses can occur often in user-generated content. we
found that all four values can be extrapolated with high accuracy to
out-of-vocabulary words by regressing on dependency-based word
embeddings [29] (median absolute error of about 0.1). generaliz-
ing lexical attributes using id27s was previously used
for applications such as    gurative language detection [55].

characteristics of the entire argument. we measure the number
of paragraphs and the number of sentences: persuasive arguments
have signi   cantly more of both. to capture the lexical diversity in
an argument, we consider the type-token ratio and word id178.
persuasive arguments are more diverse in root reply and full path,
but the type-token ratio is surprisingly higher in root truncated: be-
cause of correlations with length and argument structure, lexical di-
versity is hard to interpret for texts of different lengths. finally, we
compute flesch-kincaid grade level [26] to represent readability.
although there is no signi   cant difference in root reply, persuasive
arguments are more complex in full path.
formatting. last but not least, discussions on the internet employ
certain writing conventions enabled by the user interface. since
reddit comments use markdown15 for formatting, we can recover
the usage of bold, italic, bullet lists, numbered lists and links for-
matting.16 while these features are not applicable in face-to-face
arguments, more and more communication takes place online, mak-
ing them highly relevant. using absolute number, most of them are
signi   cant except numbered lists. when it comes to normalized
counts, though, only italicizing exhibits signi   cance.

4.2.3 they hold no quarter, they ask no quarter
understanding how a line of argument might evolve is another
interesting research problem. we investigate by quartering each
argument and measuring certain feature values in each quarter, al-
lowing for    ner-grained insight into argument structure.
word score   based features in quarters. (figure 6) with the ex-
ception of arousal, effective arguments and ineffective arguments
present similar patterns: the middle is more concrete and less dom-
inant than the beginning and end, while valence rises slightly over
the course of an argument. we also see interesting differences in
psycholinguistic patterns between original posts and replies. (we

15 https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/
16we also consider numbered words (   rst, second, third, etc.) as the
textual version of numbered lists.

1st2nd3rd4th0.3960.3970.3980.3990.4000.4010.402arousaleffectivenoteffective1st2nd3rd4th0.4850.4900.4950.5000.505concretenesseffectivenoteffective1st2nd3rd4th0.55400.55450.55500.55550.55600.55650.55700.55750.55800.5585dominanceeffectivenoteffective1st2nd3rd4th0.5500.5510.5520.5530.5540.5550.556valenceeffectivenoteffective1st2nd3rd4th0.3980.3990.4000.4010.4020.4030.404arousalmalleableresistant1st2nd3rd4th0.4850.4900.4950.5000.5050.5100.515concretenessmalleableresistant1st2nd3rd4th0.5400.5450.5500.555dominancemalleableresistant1st2nd3rd4th0.5300.5350.5400.5450.5500.555valencemalleableresistantfigure 7: similarity between each quar-
ter of an argument and the entire original
post.

figure 8: prediction results. the cyan fraction in the left    gure shows the performance in root
truncated, and the purple bar shows the performance in root reply. the magenta line shows
the performance of #words in root reply, while the gray line shows the performance of #words
in root truncated, which is the same as random guessing. the    gure on the right gives the
performance in full path (the magenta line gives the performance of #words). the number of
stars indicate the signi   cance level compared to the #words baseline according to mcnemar   s
test. (*: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.01, ***: p < 0.001.)

defer detailed discussion to   5.) in terms of arousal, however, suc-
cessful arguments begin by using calmer words.
interplay with the original post.
(figure 7) to capture partial
overlap and possible divergence from the op   s view, we divide
both the original post and the rooted path-unit into quarters, and
measure similarity metrics between all subdivisions (including the
full unit).17 since the reply fraction in content words is the most
signi   cant interplay feature, in figure 7 we only show the frac-
tion of common content words in different quarters of replies vs.
the original post. both effective and ineffective arguments start off
more similar with the original post; effective arguments remain less
similar overall.
4.3 prediction results

we train id28 models with (cid:96)1 id173 on the
training set and choose parameters using    ve cross-validation folds,
ensuring that all pairs of arguments that share the same op are in
the same fold.18 all features are standardized to unit variance, and
missing values are imputed using the training fold sample mean.
we evaluate using pairwise accuracy in the heldout dataset, where
we restricted ourselves to a single experimental run (after holding
our collective breath) to further reduce the risk of over   tting. the
results are, in fact, in line with what we describe in the training-data
analysis here.
feature sets. as shown in   4.2, the number of words is very pre-
dictive, providing a strong baseline to compare against. bag-of-
words features (bow) usually provide a strong benchmark for text
classi   cation tasks. we restrict the size of the vocabulary by re-
moving rare words that occurred no more than 5 times in train-
ing and (cid:96)2-normalize term frequency vectors. since part-of-speech
tags may also capture properties of the argument, we also use nor-
malized term frequency vectors by treating part-of-speech tags as
words (pos). features in   4.2.1 are referred to as interplay; fea-
tures in   4.2.2 constitute the feature set style. finally, we use a

17in prediction, we also take the maximum and minimum of these
quarter-wise measures as an order-independent way to summarize
fragment similarity.
18we also tried (cid:96)2 id173, id79s and gradient
boosting classi   ers and found no improvement beyond the cross-
validation standard error.

combination of style and interplay, as well as a combination that
includes all the above features (all). note that style and interplay
are dense and very low-dimensional compared to bow.
interplay with the op plays an essential role. (figure 8) #words
is indeed a very strong baseline that achieves an accuracy of 60%
in root reply and 66% in full path. as a sanity check, in root trun-
cated, it indeed gets only 50%. in comparison, bow achieves sim-
ilar performance as #words, while pos gives even worse perfor-
mance. however, interplay features lead to a 5% absolute improve-
ment over the #words baseline in root reply and full path, and a 14%
absolute improvement in root truncated. in fact, the performance of
interplay is already close to using the combination of interplay and
style and using all features. in root truncated, although the perfor-
mance of style features drops signi   cantly, interplay achieves very
similar performance as in root reply, demonstrating the robustness
of the interplay features.

5.

   resistance    to persuasion

although it is a good-faith step for a person to post on cmv,
some beliefs in the dataset are still    resistant    to changes, possi-
bly depending on how strongly the op holds them and how the
op acquired and maintained them [45, 54, 59]. since cmv mem-
bers must state their opinion and reasons for it in their own words,
we can investigate differences between how resistant and malleable
views are expressed. in this section, we seek linguistic and style
patterns characterizing original posts in order to better understand
the mechanisms behind attitude resistance and expression, and to
give potential challengers a sense of which views may be resistant
before they engage.

however, recognizing the    malleable    cases is not an easy task:
in a pilot study, human annotators perform at chance level (50%
on a paired task to distinguish which of two original posts is mal-
leable). in light of our observation that persuasion is unsuccessful
in 70% of the cases from   3, we set up an imbalanced prediction
task. we focus on cases where at least 10 challengers attempt coun-
terarguments, and where the op replied at least once,19 alleviating

19although in preprocessing we replaced all explicit edits, we also
remove all posts containing the word    changed   , to avoid includ-
ing post-hoc signals of view change.

1st2nd3rd4th0.410.420.430.440.450.460.470.480.49argumentfractioneffectivenoteffective50%55%60%65%accuracy#wordsbowposinterplaystyleinterplay+styleall******rootreply50%55%60%65%70%accuracy**fullpathtable 4: opinion malleability task: statistically signi   cant features
after bonferroni correction.

feature name
#1st person pronouns
frac. 1st person pronoun
dominance
frac. 1st person plural pronoun
#paragraphs
#1st person plural pronoun
#bolds
arousal
valence
bullet list

more malleable?
            
            
            
         
      
      
   
   
   
   

the concern that an opinion appears resistant simply because there
was little effort towards changing it. this brings us 10,743 original
posts in the training data and 1,529 original posts in the heldout
data. we then analyze systematic expression patterns that charac-
terize malleable beliefs and that signal open-mindedness.
5.1 stylistic features for open-mindedness

we employ the same set of features from   4.2.2 to capture the
characteristics of original posts. among them, only a handful are
signi   cantly predictive of malleability, as shown in table 4.
personal pronouns and self-af   rmation. first person pronouns
are strong indicators of malleability, but    rst person plural pro-
nouns correlate with resistance. in psychology, self-af   rmation has
been found to indicate open-mindedness and make beliefs more
likely to yield [11, 12]. our result aligns with these    ndings: indi-
vidualizing one   s relationship with a belief using    rst person pro-
nouns af   rms the self, while    rst person plurals can indicate a di-
luted sense of group responsibility for the view. note that it was
also found in other work that openness is negatively correlated with
   rst person singular pronouns [39].
formatting. the use of more paragraphs, bold formatting, and
bulleted lists are all higher when a malleable view is expressed.
taking more time and presenting the reasons behind an opinion in
a more elaborated form can indicate more engagement.
word score   based features. dominance is the most predictive of
malleability: the average amount of control expressed through the
words used is higher when describing a malleable view than a re-
sistant one. the same holds for happiness (captured by valence).
in terms of arousal, malleable opinions are expressed signi   cantly
more serenely, ending on a particularly calm note in the    nal quar-
ter, while stubborn opinions are expressed with relatively more ex-
citement.
5.2 prediction performance

we use weighted id28 and choose the amount and
type of id173 ((cid:96)1 or (cid:96)2) by grid search over 5 cross-validation
folds. since this is an imbalanced task, we evaluate the prediction
results using the area under the roc curve (auc) score. as in
  4, we use the number of words as our baseline.
in addition to
the above features that characterizes language style (style), we use
bag-of-words (bow), part-of-speech tags (pos) and a full feature
set (all). the holdout performance is shown in figure 9.

the classi   ers trained on bag of words features signi   cantly out-
performs the #words baseline. among words with largest coef-
   cients, resistant views tend to be expressed using more decisive
words such as anyone, certain, ever, nothing, and wrong, while
help and please are malleable words. the pos classi   er signi   -
cantly outperforms random guessing, but not the baseline. never-
theless, it yields an interesting insight: comparative adjectives and

figure 9: opinion malleability prediction performance: auc
on the heldout dataset. the purple line shows the performance
of #words, while the gray line gives the performance of random
guessing. the bow and all feature sets perform signi   cantly bet-
ter than the #words baseline, according to one-sided paired permu-
tation tests. bow, pos, style and all outperform random guess-
ing using bootstrapped tests. (*: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.01, ***:
p < 0.001.)

adverbs are signs of malleability, while superlative adjectives sug-
gest stubboid56ess. the full feature set (all) also signi   cantly out-
perform the #words baseline. the overall low scores suggest that
this is indeed a challenging task for both humans and machines.

6. further discussion

here we discuss other observations that may open up avenues for

further investigation of the complex process of persuasion.
experience level. beyond the interactions within a discussion tree,
cmv is a community where users can accumulate experience and
potentially improve their persuasion ability. figure 10a shows that
a member   s success rate goes up with the number of attempts made.
this observation can be explained by at least two reasons:
the
success rate of frequent challengers improves over time, and/or
frequent challengers are better at persuasion from the beginning.
to disentangle these two possible reasons, for challengers who at-
tempted to change at least 16 views, we split all the attempts into 4
equal chunks sorted by time. figure 10b presents how the success
rate changes over a challenger   s life, suggesting that the success
rate of frequent challengers does not increase.20
it is worth not-
ing that this lack of apparent improvement might be explained by a
gradual development of a    taste    for original posts that are harder
to address [30]. such community dynamics point to interesting re-
search questions for future work.
attempts to capture high-level linguistic properties. we experi-
mented with a broader set of features in cross validation, which we
still deem interesting but did not discuss in depth for space reasons.
one important class are attempts to capture the semantics of orig-
inal statements and arguments. we experimented with using topic
models [3] to    nd topics that are the most malleable (topic: food,
eat, eating, thing, meat and topic: read, book, lot, books, women),
and the most resistant (topic: government, state, world, country,
countries and topic: sex, women, fat, person, weight). however,
topic model based features do not seem to bring predictive power
to either of the tasks. for predicting persuasive arguments, we at-
tempted to capture interplay with id27s for text similar-

20in terms of the correlation between previous success (lifetime
deltas) and success rate, the result is similar: beyond 4   5 deltas
there is no noticeable increase.

0.480.500.520.540.56auc#wordsbowposstyleallrandom**finally, beyond mechanisms behind persuasion, it is a vital re-
search problem to understand how community norms encourage
such a well-behaved platform so that useful rules, moderation prac-
tices, or even automated tools can be deployed in future community
building.

9. appendix

in this section we explain the features based on word categories.
    (in)de   nite articles (inspired by [13]). these are highly corre-
lated with length, so they are both highly signi   cant in terms of
absolute numbers. however, in terms of word ratios, de   nite arti-
cles (e.g.,    the    instead of    a   ) are preferred, which suggests that
speci   city is important in persuasive arguments.

    positive and negative words. we use the positive and negative
lexicons from liwc [40]. in absolute numbers, successful argu-
ments are more sentiment-laden in both root reply and full path.
when truncating, as well as when taking the frequency ratio, per-
suasive opening arguments use fewer positive words, suggesting
more complex patterns of positive emotion in longer arguments
[23, 58].

    arguer-relevant personal pronouns. we consider 1st person pro-
nouns (me) 2nd person pronouns (you) and 1st person plural pro-
nouns (us). in both root reply and full path, persuasive arguments
use a signi   cantly larger absolute number of personal pronouns.
    links. citing external evidence online is often accomplished
using hyperlinks. persuasive arguments use consistently more
links, both in absolute and in per-word count. we make spe-
cial categories for interesting classes of links: those to .com and
.edu domains, and those to pdf documents. maybe due to high
recall, .com links seem to be most powerful. features based on
links also tend to be signi   cant even in the root truncated condi-
tion.

    hedging. hedges indicate uncertainty; an example is    it could be
the case   . their presence might signal a weaker argument [16],
but alternately, they may make an argument easier to accept by
softening its tone [28]. we curate a set of hedging cues based
on [21, 24]. hedging is more common in persuasive arguments
under root reply and full path.

    examples. we consider occurrences of    for example   ,    for in-
stance   , and    e.g.   . the absolute number of such example mark-
ers is signi   cantly higher in persuasive arguments.

    question marks. questions can be used for clari   cation or rhetor-
ical purposes. in terms of absolute number, there are more in root
reply and full path. but when it comes to ratio, if anything, it
seems better to avoid using question marks.

    quotations. one common practice in argumentation is to quote
the other party   s words. however, this does not seem to be a
useful strategy for the root reply.

acknowledgments. we thank x. chen, j. hessel, s. hu, s. kundu,
n. li, m. raghu, n. rojas, a. scho   eld, t. shi, and j. zhang
for participating in our pilot annotation experiments. we thank y.
artzi, j. carpenter, p. grabowicz, j. hessel, y. hua, j. park, m.
rooth, a. scho   eld, a. singh, and the anonymous reviewers for
helpful comments. this work was supported in part by nsf grant
iis-0910664, a google research grant, a google faculty research
award and a facebook fellowship.

(a) delta ratio vs. log2 #posts.

(b) no growth over life.

figure 10: effect of experience.

ity using both the centroid distance and the word mover   s distance
[27]. both distances proved predictive by themselves, but were not
able to improve over the features presented in the paper in cross
validation. more generally, better semantic models applicable to
online discussions could open up deeper investigations into effec-
tive persuasion strategies.
sequential argument structure. another promising direction is to
examine the structure of arguments via the sequence of discourse
connectors. for instance, we can recover interesting structures such
as       rst0   but1   because2    and    now1   then2   instead3   , where the
subscripts indicate which quarter the discourse connector occurred
in. these features did not perform well in our tasks due to low re-
call, or lack of argumentative structure in the data, but they deserve
further exploration.
7. additional related work

a few lines of research in natural language processing are re-
lated to our work. argumentation mining focuses on    ne-grained
analysis of arguments and on discovering the relationships, such
as support and premise, between different arguments [34]. studies
have also worked on understanding persuasive essays [18, 41, 51]
and opinion analysis in terms of agreement and ideology [53, 49,
22, 50, 48]. another innovative way of using internet data to study
mass persuasion is through adwords [20].
8. conclusion

in this work, in order to understand the mechanisms behind per-
suasion, we use a unique dataset from /r/changemyview. in
addition to examining interaction dynamics, we develop a frame-
work for analyzing persuasive arguments and malleable opinions.
we    nd that not only are interaction patterns connected to the suc-
cess of persuasion, but language is also found to distinguish persua-
sive arguments. dissimilarity with the wording in which the opin-
ion is expressed turns out to be the most predictive signal among all
features. although members of cmv are open-minded and willing
to change, we are still able to identify opinions that are resistant
and to characterize them using linguistic patterns.

there are many possible extensions to our approach for repre-
senting arguments. in particular, it would be interesting to model
the framing of different arguments and examine the interplay be-
tween framing of the original post and the replies. for instance, is
bene   t-cost analysis the only way to convince a utilitarian?

furthermore, although this novel dataset opens up potential op-
portunities for future work, other environments, where people are
not as open-minded, can exhibit different kinds of persuasive in-
teractions; it remains an interesting problem how our    ndings gen-
eralize to different contexts. it is also important to understand the
effects of attitude change on actual behavior [44].

02468log2#postsattempted0.5%1.0%1.5%2.0%2.5%3.0%deltapercentage1st2nd3rd4thquarterinuserlife1.3%1.4%1.5%1.6%deltapercentagereferences
[1] t. althoff, c. danescu-niculescu-mizil, and d. jurafsky.
how to ask for a favor: a case study on the success of al-
truistic requests. in proceedings of icwsm, 2014.

[2] m. bailey, d. j. hopkins, and t. rogers. unresponsive and
unpersuaded: the unintended consequences of voter persua-
sion efforts. in meeting of the society for political methodol-
ogy at the university of virginia, 2014.

[3] d. m. blei, a. y. ng, and m. i. jordan. latent dirichlet al-

location. j. mach. learn. res., 3:993   1022, 2003.

[4] c. j. bryan, g. m. walton, t. rogers, and c. s. dweck. mo-
tivating voter turnout by invoking the self. proceedings of the
national academy of sciences, 108(31):12653   12656, 2011.

[5] m. brysbaert, a. b. warriner, and v. kuperman. concrete-
ness ratings for 40 thousand generally known english word
lemmas. behavior research methods, 46(3):904   911, 2014.

[6] m. burgoon, s. b. jones, and d. stewart. toward a message-
centered theory of persuasion: three empirical investigations
of language intensity. human communication research, 1
(3):240   256, 1975.

[7] s. chaiken. the heuristic model of persuasion.

in   uence: the ontario symposium, 1987.

in social

[8] m. j. chambliss and r. garner. do adults change their minds
after reading persuasive text? written communication, 13(3):
291   313, 1996.

[9] r. b. cialdini.

in   uence: the psychology of persuasion.

harpercollins, 1993.

[10] r. b. cialdini, w. wosinska, d. w. barrett, j. butner, and
m. gornik-durose. compliance with a request in two cul-
tures: the differential in   uence of social proof and com-
mitment/consistency on collectivists and individualists. per-
sonality and social psychology bulletin, 25(10):1242   1253,
1999.

[11] g. l. cohen, j. aronson, and c. m. steele. when beliefs
yield to evidence: reducing biased evaluation by af   rming
the self. personality and social psychology bulletin, 26(9):
1151   1164, 2000.

[12] j. correll, s. j. spencer, and m. p. zanna. an af   rmed self and
an open mind: self-af   rmation and sensitivity to argument
strength. journal of experimental social psychology, 40(3):
350   356, 2004.

[13] c. danescu-niculescu-mizil, j. cheng, j. kleinberg, and
l. lee. you had me at hello: how phrasing affects memo-
rability. in proceedings of acl, 2012.

[14] c. danescu-niculescu-mizil, l. lee, b. pang, and j. klein-
berg. echoes of power: language effects and power differ-
ences in social interaction. in proceedings of www, 2012.

[15] j. p. dillard and l. shen. the persuasion handbook: devel-
opments in theory and practice. sage publications, 2014.

[16] a. m. durik, m. a. britt, r. reynolds, and j. storey. the
effects of hedges in persuasive arguments: a nuanced analy-
sis of language. journal of language and social psychology,
2008.

[17] a. h. eagly and s. chaiken. the psychology of attitudes.

harcourt brace jovanovich college publishers, 1993.

[18] n. farra, s. somasundaran, and j. burstein. scoring persua-
sive essays using opinions and their targets. in proceedings of
the naacl workshop on innovative use of nlp for building
educational applications, 2015.

[19] b. j. fogg. mass interpersonal persuasion: an early view of

a new phenomenon. in persuasive technology, 2008.

[20] m. guerini, c. strapparava, and o. stock. id74
for persuasive nlp with google adwords. in proceedings of
lrec, 2010.

[21] d. a. hanauer, y. liu, q. mei, f. j. manion, u. j. balis, and
k. zheng. hedging their mets: the use of uncertainty terms in
clinical documents and its potential implications when shar-
ing the documents with patients. in proceedings of the amia
annual symposium, 2012.

[22] k. s. hasan and v. ng. why are you taking this stance? iden-
tifying and classifying reasons in ideological debates. in pro-
ceedings of emnlp, 2014.

[23] c. r. hullett. the impact of mood on persuasion: a meta-

analysis. communication research, 32(4):423   442, 2005.

[24] k. hyland. hedging in scienti   c research articles.

benjamins publishing, 1998.

john

[25] a. jaech, v. zayats, h. fang, m. ostendorf, and h. hajishirzi.
talking to the crowd: what do people react to in online dis-
in proceedings of emnlp, pages 2026   2031,
cussions?
2015.

[26] j. p. kincaid, r. p. fishburne jr, r. l. rogers, and b. s.
chissom. derivation of new readability formulas (automated
readability index, fog count and flesch reading ease formula)
for navy enlisted personnel. chief of naval technical train-
ing, naval air station, research branch report 8-75, 1975.

[27] m. j. kusner, y. sun, n. i. kolkin, and k. q. weinberger.
from id27s to document distances. in proceed-
ings of icml, 2015.

[28] g. lakoff. hedges: a study in meaning criteria and the logic

of fuzzy concepts. journal of philosophical logic, 2, 1975.

[29] o. levy and y. goldberg. dependency-based word embed-

dings. in proceedings of acl, 2014.

[30] j. j. mcauley and j. leskovec. from amateurs to connois-
seurs: modeling the evolution of user expertise through on-
line reviews. in proceedings of www, 2013.

[31] a. k. mccallum. mallet: a machine learning for language

toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu, 2002.

[32] d. mcraney.

the

back   re

effect.

//youarenotsosmart.com/2011/06/10/
the-backfire-effect/, 2011.
10-15.

accessed:

http:

2015-

[33] t. mitra and e. gilbert. the language that gets people to
in pro-

give: phrases that predict success on kickstarter.
ceedings of cscw, 2014.

[51] c. stab and i. gurevych. identifying argumentative discourse
in proceedings of emnlp,

structures in persuasive essays.
2014.

[52] c. tan, l. lee, and b. pang. the effect of wording on mes-
sage propagation: topic- and author-controlled natural exper-
iments on twitter. in proceedings of acl, 2014.

[53] m. thomas, b. pang, and l. lee. get out the vote: determin-
ing support or opposition from congressional    oor-debate
transcripts. in proceedings of emnlp, 2006.

[54] z. l. tormala and r. e. petty. what doesn   t kill me makes
me stronger: the effects of resisting persuasion on attitude
certainty. journal of personality and social psychology, 83
(6):1298, 2002.

[55] y. tsvetkov, l. boytsov, a. gershman, e. nyberg, and
c. dyer. metaphor detection with cross-lingual model trans-
fer. in proceedings of acl, 2014.

[56] o. tykocinski, e. t. higgins, and s. chaiken. message
framing, self-discrepancies, and yielding to persuasive mes-
sages: the motivational signi   cance of psychological situa-
tions. personality and social psychology bulletin, 20(1):107   
115, 1994.

[57] a. b. warriner, v. kuperman, and m. brysbaert. norms of
valence, arousal, and dominance for 13,915 english lemmas.
behavior research methods, 45(4):1191   1207, 2013.

[58] d. t. wegener and r. e. petty. effects of mood on persua-
sion processes: enhancing, reducing, and biasing scrutiny of
attitude-relevant information. in l. l. martin and a. tesser,
editors, striving and feeling: interactions among goals, af-
fect, and self-regulation. psychology press, 1996.

[59] j. r. zuwerink and p. g. devine. attitude importance and re-
sistance to persuasion: it   s not just the thought that counts.
journal of personality and social psychology, 70(5):931,
1996.

[34] r. mochales and m.-f. moens. argumentation mining. arti-

   cial intelligence and law, 19(1):1   22, 2011.

[35] k. g. niederhoffer and j. w. pennebaker. linguistic style
matching in social interaction. journal of language and so-
cial psychology, 21(4):337   360, 2002.

[36] b. nyhan and j. rei   er. when corrections fail: the persis-
tence of political misperceptions. political behavior, 32(2):
303   330, 2010.

[37] d. j. o   keefe. standpoint explicitness and persuasive effect:
a meta-analytic review of the effects of varying conclusion
articulation in persuasive messages. argumentation and ad-
vocacy, 34(1):1   12, 1997.

[38] d. j. o   keefe. justi   cation explicitness and persuasive ef-
fect: a meta-analytic review of the effects of varying support
articulation in persuasive messages. argumentation and ad-
vocacy, 35(2):61   75, 1998.

[39] j. w. pennebaker and l. a. king. linguistic styles: language
use as an individual difference. j pers soc psychol, 77(6):
1296   1312, 1999.

[40] j. w. pennebaker, m. e. francis, and r. j. booth. linguistic
inquiry and word count: liwc 2007. technical report, 2007.

[41] i. persing and v. ng. modeling argument strength in student

essays. in proceedings of acl, 2015.

[42] r. e. petty and j. t. cacioppo. communication and per-
suasion: central and peripheral routes to attitude change.
springer science & business media, 2012.

[43] r. e. petty and d. t. wegener. matching versus mismatch-
ing attitude functions: implications for scrutiny of persuasive
messages. personality and social psychology bulletin, 24(3):
227   240, 1998.

[44] r. e. petty, d. t. wegener, and l. r. fabrigar. attitudes and
attitude change. annual review of psychology, 48(1):609   
647, 1997.

[45] e. m. pomerantz, s. chaiken, and r. s. tordesillas. attitude
strength and resistance processes. journal of personality and
social psychology, 69(3):408, 1995.

[46] s. l. popkin. the reasoning voter: communication and per-
suasion in presidential campaigns. university of chicago
press, chicago, 1994.

[47] k. k. reardon. persuasion in practice. sage, 1991.

[48] s. rosenthal and k. mckeown. i couldn   t agree more: the
role of conversational structure in agreement and disagree-
ment detection in online discussions. in proceedings of sig-
dial, 2015.

[49] s. somasundaran and j. wiebe. recognizing stances in ideo-
logical on-line debates. in proceedings of the naacl work-
shop on computational approaches to analysis and genera-
tion of emotion in text, 2010.

[50] d. sridhar, j. foulds, b. huang, l. getoor, and m. walker.
joint models of disagreement and stance in online debate. in
proceedings of acl, 2015.

