5
1
0
2
 
c
e
d
2

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
2
7
0
0

.

2
1
5
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

annotating character relationships in literary texts

philip massey and patrick xia
school of computer science
carnegie mellon university

david bamman

school of information

university of california, berkeley

{pmassey,paxia}@cmu.edu

dbamman@berkeley.edu

noah a. smith

computer science & engineering

university of washington

nasmith@cs.washington.edu

1 overview

we present a dataset of manually annotated relationships between characters in literary texts, in order
to support the training and evaluation of automatic methods for relation type prediction in this domain
(makazhanov et al., 2014; kokkinakis, 2013) and the broader computational analysis of literary character
(elson et al., 2010; bamman et al., 2014; vala et al., 2015; flekova and gurevych, 2015). in this work, we
solicit annotations from workers on amazon mechanical turk on four dimensions of interest: for a given
pair of characters, we collect judgments as to the coarse-grained category (professional, social, familial),
   ne-grained category (friend, lover, parent, rival, employer), and af   nity (positive, negative, neutral) that
describes their primary relationship in a text. we do not assume that this relationship is static; we also collect
judgments as to whether it changes at any point in the course of the text.
the annotations describe character dyads in 109 texts ranging from homer   s iliad to joyce   s ulysses (see
section 3 for a full list). rather than relying on annotators    expertise in these texts, we frame the annotation
problem as one of estimating the relationship as depicted in a third-party summary (sparknotes); this allows
annotators to provide judgments on the relationship between pairs of characters by only reading a summary
of a book, and not the book itself. while this approach naturally loses the nuance of a truly expert opinion,
it allows us to broadly characterize a large number literary dyads, assess the feasibility of this annotation
strategy, and provide a foundation on which other work can build. all data is openly available at http://
github.com/dbamman/characterrelations, and we encourage contributions and corrections.

2 data collection

our primary corpus selection criterion was that a text is both available on project gutenberg (to enable
computational analysis of an open-access text) and is the subject of a study guide on www.sparknotes.
com (to enable annotation by non-experts). sparknotes provides a detailed summary of the plot and major
characters in texts, often a structured format (e.g., a section denoted    character list    ); from this summary
we extract all characters and use them to populate the following questionnaire.

1

fictional character relationship analysis

in this task, you   ll be identifying the relationship type that exists between two characters in the good soldier
by ford madox ford, using a description and summary of that work from sparknotes. (for example, if
reading to kill a mockingbird, you   d mark that atticus finch is the father of scout finch.)

we expect this task to take approximately 20 minutes. please read the "character list," "plot overview,"
and "character analysis / analysis of major characters" pages here: http://www.sparknotes.com/
lit/goodsoldier/.

after reading these pages, list all of the relationships that you can identify between the characters described
there. to complete a relationship,    nd the two characters in the dropdown menus below with first character
and second character. then, answer the following questions using these guidelines:

af   nity:

how do the two characters feel toward each other? for example, if they are friendly, select "positive". if
it is unclear how they feel toward each other or if they do not have strong opinions about each other, select
"neutral". if they are enemies or rivals, or hate each other, select "negative".

category:

how are the two characters related? if they are friends, select "social". if they share a relationship because
they work with each other, select "professional". if they are family, then select "familial".

kind:

speci   cally, how is the first character related to the second character? for example, if the first character
is the husband of the second character, then select "husband". please keep the category and the kind
consistent:

if you selected "social", then the kind must be one of these:

    friend
    enemy
    acquaintance
    lovers
    unrequited love interest (x is in love with y, but y is not in love with x)
    rivals

if you selected "professional", then the kind must be one of these:

    employer
    employee
    colleague
    servant
    master
    student
    teacher
    client

2

    person offering service to client (e.g., lawyer)

if you selected "familial", then the kind must be one of these:

    husband/wife
    brother/sister
    cousin
    uncle/aunt
    niece/nephew
    child
    parent
    grandchild
    grandparent
    orphan
    foster parent
    step-child
    step-parent
    in-law relation (e.g., mother-in-law; specify in detail)
    half relation (e.g., half-sister; specify in detail)

change:

does the relationship between the two characters signi   cantly change at some point in the book? for ex-
ample, does a "positive" relationship become "negative", or do "lovers" become "husband/wife" or "friends"
become "enemies"? if so, select "yes" here and describe the change in the detail section below. if the
relationship remains the same throughout (for example, "brother/sister"), then select "no".

detail:

if the relationship type you feel holds between two characters was not provided, or you want to provide
additional information, enter it here.

if two characters hold multiple relations to each other (such as "professional: colleague" and "social:
lovers"), enter those multiple relations in different rows below. please identify a total of 10 relations be-
tween characters in the rows below.

(users then select a pair of characters from the following list and label the relations speci   ed above):

    john dowell
    florence hurlbird dowell
    leonora powys ashburnham
    captain edward ashburnham
    nancy rufford
    jimmy
    uncle john hurlbird
    maisie maidan
    rodney bayham
    mrs. basil
    la dolciquita

3

    the misses hurlbird
    selmes
    major rufford

we present this questionnaire to workers on amazon mechanical turk, soliciting two independent judg-
ments for each of the 109 literary texts. since we are soliciting judgments regarding any 10 character pairs
in the text (and not a    xed set of such dyads), many of the character pairs from different annotators for the
same work do not overlap. we collect a total of 2,170 annotations; among these, 392 character dyads have
annotations by two different annotators, from which we can calculate agreement statistics. table 1 lists the
inter-annotator agreement rate (and fleiss      , correcting for chance) for each of the four annotation classes.
the agreement rates for both the coarse- and    ne-grained categories are both high, even when correcting for
chance (   = 0.812 and 0.744, respectively). 18.1% of character pairs are judged to exhibit some change
over the course of the text. while annotators display high agreement on this (75.7%), their agreement is in
fact quite low when correcting for chance (   = 0.208). judging whether a dyad   s relationship is positive,
negative or neutral also proves to be quite dif   cult, with low agreement rates across annotators.

figure 1 shows the distribution of af   nity and coarse-grained category annotations, while    gure 2 shows the
distribution of    ne-grained category annotations.

label type
af   nity
category
kind
change

iaa
0.627
0.879
0.765
0.757

fleiss      

0.364
0.812
0.744
0.208

n
391
389
392
371

table 1: inter-annotator agreement (iaa) rates, along with chance-corrected fleiss       for the four annotation tasks. n
denotes the sample size of directed character pairs with two annotations; sample size exhibits question-level variability
due to incomplete responses.

figure 1: distribution of af   nity annotations (left) and coarse-grained category annotations (right).

4

positivenegativeneutral020040060080010001200socialfamilialprofessional02004006008001000figure 2: distribution of    ne-grained category annotations.

3 texts

    alexandre dumas. the count of monte cristo, the three musketeers
    aristophanes. lysistrata
    bram stoker. dracula
    charles dickens. a tale of two cities, bleak house, great expectations, hard times, oliver twist
    charlotte perkins gilman. herland
    christopher marlowe. the jew of malta
    e. m. forster. howards end
    edith wharton. ethan frome, the house of mirth
    edmond rostand. cyrano de bergerac
    f. scott fitzgerald. this side of paradise
    frances hodgson burnett. the secret garden
    franz kafka. the trial
    frederick douglass. narrative of the life of frederick douglass
    george bernard shaw. major barbara, pygmalion
    george eliot. adam bede, middlemarch, silas marner
    gustave flaubert. madame bovary
    harriet beecher stowe. uncle tom   s cabin
    henrik ibsen. a doll   s house, ghosts, hedda gabler
    henry james. the american, the portrait of a lady, the turn of the screw

5

friendhusband/wifeloversparentenemybrother/sisterchildacquaintanceservantunrequited love interestcolleagueemployeerivalsmasterperson offering service to clientuncle/auntemployercousinteacherniece/nephewfoster parentin-law relationstep-parentclientstudenthalf relationorphangrandparentstep-child0100200300400sensibility

    herman melville. typee
    hermann hesse. siddhartha
    homer. the iliad
    jack london. white fang
    james fenimore cooper. the last of the mohicans
    james joyce. a portrait of the artist as a young man, dubliners, ulysses
    jane austen. emma, mans   eld park, northanger abbey, persuasion, pride and prejudice, sense and
    john milton. paradise lost
    joseph conrad. heart of darkness, lord jim
    l. m. montgomery. anne of green gables
    leo tolstoy. anna karenina, war and peace
    louisa may alcott. little women
    marcel proust. swann   s way
    mark twain. the adventures of tom sawyer
    miguel de cervantes. don quixote
    nathaniel hawthorne. the house of the seven gables, the scarlet letter
    oscar wilde. an ideal husband, the picture of dorian gray
    plato. the republic
    robert louis stevenson. dr. jekyll and mr. hyde, kidnapped, treasure island
    sinclair lewis. babbitt, main street
    stephen crane. maggie: a girl of the streets
    theodore dreiser. sister carrie
    thomas hardy. far from the madding crowd, jude the obscure, the mayor of casterbridge, the
    thomas kyd. spanish tragedy
    upton sinclair. the jungle
    virgil. the aeneid
    voltaire. candide
    willa cather. o pioneers!
    william shakespeare. a midsummer night   s dream, antony and cleopatra, as you like it, haid113t,
henry iv part 1, henry iv part 2, henry v, henry vi part 1, henry vi part 2, henry vi part 3,
henry viii, julius caesar, king john, king lear, love   s labours lost, macbeth, measure for mea-
sure, much ado about nothing, othello, richard ii, romeo and juliet, the comedy of errors, the
merchant of venice, the merry wives of windsor, the taming of the shrew, the tempest, the two
gentlemen of verona, the winter   s tale, timon of athens, titus andronicus, troilus and cressida,
twelfth night

return of the native

4 data

all annotations are freely available at http://github.com/dbamman/characterrelations.
rather than reconciling disagreements between annotators or    ltering out incomplete responses, we are
making all collected data available; each annotations is paired with an (anonymized) identi   er of the anno-
tator who provided it.

6

5 acknowledgments

we thank matthew jockers, andrew piper, ted underwood and chris warren for helpful feedback. this
research was supported by a google research award and was made possible through the use of computing
resources made available by the open science data cloud (osdc), an open cloud consortium (occ)-
sponsored project.

6 references

david bamman, ted underwood, and noah a. smith. a bayesian mixed effects model of literary character.

in
proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long papers),
pages 370   379, baltimore, maryland, june 2014. association for computational linguistics.

david k. elson, nicholas dames, and kathleen r. mckeown. extracting social networks from literary    ction. in
proceedings of the 48th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, acl    10, pages 138   147,
stroudsburg, pa, usa, 2010. association for computational linguistics.

lucie flekova and iryna gurevych. personality pro   ling of    ctional characters using sense-level links between lexical
resources. in proceedings of the 2015 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages
1805   1816, lisbon, portugal, september 2015. association for computational linguistics.

dimitrios kokkinakis. annotation of interpersonal relations in swedish prose    ction. in third workshop on annotation

of corpora for research in the humanities (acrh-3), 2013.

aibek makazhanov, denilson barbosa, and grzegorz kondrak. extracting family relationship networks from novels.

corr, abs/1405.0603, 2014.

hardik vala, david jurgens, andrew piper, and derek ruths. mr. bennet, his coachman, and the archbishop walk into
a bar but only one of them gets recognized: on the dif   culty of detecting characters in literary texts. in proceedings
of the 2015 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 769   774, lisbon, portugal,
september 2015. association for computational linguistics.

7

