visual storytelling

ting-hao (kenneth) huang1   , francis ferraro2   , nasrin mostafazadeh3, ishan misra1, aishwarya agrawal4,

jacob devlin6, ross girshick5, xiaodong he6, pushmeet kohli6, dhruv batra4, c. lawrence zitnick5,

devi parikh4, lucy vanderwende6, michel galley6, margaret mitchell6,7

microsoft research

1 carnegie mellon university; tinghaoh@cs.cmu.edu
3 university of rochester

2 johns hopkins university; ferraro@cs.jhu.edu
6 microsoft research; {jdevlin,lucyv,mgalley}@microsoft.com

4 virginia tech

5 facebook ai research, 7 now at google research; margarmitchell@gmail.com

abstract

we introduce the    rst dataset for sequential
vision-to-language, and explore how this data
may be used for the task of visual storytelling.
the    rst release of this dataset, sind1 v.1,
includes 81,743 unique photos in 20,211 se-
quences, aligned to both descriptive (caption)
and story language. we establish several
strong baselines for the storytelling task, and
motivate an automatic metric to benchmark
progress. modelling concrete description as
well as    gurative and social language, as pro-
vided in this dataset and the storytelling task,
has the potential to move arti   cial intelligence
from basic understandings of typical visual
scenes towards more and more human-like un-
derstanding of grounded event structure and
subjective expression.

introduction

1
beyond understanding simple objects and concrete
scenes lies interpreting causal structure; making
sense of visual input to tie disparate moments to-
gether as they give rise to a cohesive narrative of
events through time. this requires moving from rea-
soning about single images     static moments, de-
void of context     to sequences of images that depict
events as they occur and change. on the vision side,
progressing from single images to images in context
allows us to begin to create an arti   cial intelligence
(ai) that can reason about a visual moment given

   t.h. and f.f. contributed equally to this work.
1sequential

images narrative dataset.

the origi-
nal release was made available through microsoft.
re-
lated future releases for visual storytelling (vist) are on
visionandlanguage.net/vist.

figure 1: example language difference between descrip-
tions for images in isolation (dii) vs. stories for images
in sequence (sis).

what it has already seen. on the language side, pro-
gressing from literal description to narrative helps to
learn more evaluative, conversational, and abstract
language. this is the difference between, for ex-
ample,    sitting next to each other    versus    having
a good time   , or    sun is setting    versus    sky illumi-
nated with a brilliance...    (see figure 1). the    rst
descriptions capture image content that is literal and
concrete; the second requires further id136 about
what a good time may look like, or what is special
and worth sharing about a particular sunset.

we introduce the    rst dataset of sequential im-
ages with corresponding descriptions, which cap-
tures some of these subtle but important differ-
ences, and advance the task of visual storytelling.
we release the data in three tiers of language for
(1) descriptions of images-
the same images:
in-isolation (dii); (2) descriptions of images-in-
sequence (dis); and (3) stories for images-in-
sequence (sis). this tiered approach reveals the ef-
fect of temporal context and the effect of narrative
language. as all the tiers are aligned to the same

a group of people that are sitting next to each other. adult male wearing sunglasses lying down on black pavement. the sun is setting over the ocean and mountains. having a good time bonding and talking. [m] got exhausted by the heat.  sky illuminated with a brilliance of gold and orange hues. dii sis images, the dataset facilitates directly modeling the
relationship between literal and more abstract visual
concepts, including the relationship between visual
imagery and typical event patterns. we additionally
propose an automatic evaluation metric which is best
correlated with human judgments, and establish sev-
eral strong baselines for the visual storytelling task.

2 motivation and related work

work in vision to language has exploded, with re-
searchers examining image captioning (lin et al.,
2014; karpathy and fei-fei, 2015; vinyals et al.,
2015; xu et al., 2015; chen et al., 2015; young
et al., 2014; elliott and keller, 2013), question an-
swering (antol et al., 2015; ren et al., 2015; gao
et al., 2015; malinowski and fritz, 2014), visual
phrases (sadeghi and farhadi, 2011), video under-
standing (ramanathan et al., 2013), and visual con-
cepts (krishna et al., 2016; fang et al., 2015).

such work focuses on direct, literal description of
image content. while this is an encouraging    rst
step in connecting vision and language, it is far from
the capabilities needed by intelligent agents for nat-
uralistic interactions. there is a signi   cant differ-
ence, yet unexplored, between remarking that a vi-
sual scene shows    sitting in a room        typical of
most image captioning work     and that the same vi-
sual scene shows    bonding   . the latter description
is grounded in the visual signal, yet it brings to bear
information about social relations and emotions that
can be additionally inferred in context (figure 1).
visually-grounded stories facilitate more evaluative
and    gurative language than has previously been
seen in vision-to-language research: if a system can
recognize that colleagues look bored, it can remark
and act on this information directly.

storytelling itself is one of the oldest known hu-
man activities (wiessner, 2014), providing a way to
educate, preserve culture, instill morals, and share
advice; focusing ai research towards this task there-
fore has the potential to bring about more human-
like intelligence and understanding.

3 dataset construction
extracting photos we begin by generating a list
of    storyable    event types. we leverage the idea that
   storyable    events tend to involve some form of pos-

breaking up (350)
carnival (331)
visit (321)
market (311)
outdoor activity (267)

beach (684)
amusement park (525)
building a house (415)
party (411)
birthday (399)
table 1: the number of albums in our tiered dataset for
the 15 most frequent kinds of stories.

easter (259)
church (243)
graduation ceremony (236)
of   ce (226)
father   s day (221)

figure 2: dataset id104 work   ow.

session, e.g.,    john   s birthday party,    or    shabnam   s
visit.    using the flickr data release (thomee et al.,
2015), we aggregate 5-grams of photo titles and de-
scriptions, using stanford corenlp (manning et al.,
2014) to extract possessive dependency patterns. we
keep the heads of possessive phrases if they can be
classi   ed as an event in id1383.0, relying on
manual winnowing to target our collection efforts.2
these terms are then used to collect albums using
the flickr api.3 we only include albums with 10 to
50 photos where all album photos are taken within a
48-hour span and cc-licensed. see table 1 for the
query terms with the most albums returned.

the photos returned from this stage are then pre-
sented to crowd workers using amazon   s mechani-
cal turk to collect the corresponding stories and de-
scriptions. the id104 work   ow of devel-
oping the complete dataset is shown in figure 2.

id104 stories in sequence we develop
a 2-stage id104 work   ow to collect natu-
ralistic stories with text aligned to images. the    rst
stage is storytelling, where the crowd worker selects
a subset of photos from a given album to form a
photo sequence and writes a story about it (see fig-
ure 3). the second stage is re-telling, in which the
worker writes a story based on one photo sequence
generated by workers in the    rst stage.

in both stages, all album photos are displayed in
the order of the time that the photos were taken,
with a    storyboard    underneath. in storytelling, by
clicking a photo in the album, a    story card    of the
photo appears on the storyboard. the worker is in-

2we simultaneously supplemented this data-driven effort by

a small hand-constructed gazetteer.

3https://www.   ickr.com/services/api/

flickr album story 1 description for images in isolation & in sequences re-telling story 1 caption in sequence storytelling story 2 story 3 re-telling preferred photo sequence  story 4 story 5 figure 3: interface for the storytelling task, which con-
tains: 1) the photo album, and 2) the storyboard.

figure 4: example descriptions of images in isolation
(dii); descriptions of images in sequence (dis); and sto-
ries of images in sequence (sis).

structed to pick at least    ve photos, arrange the or-
der of selected photos, and then write a sentence or
a phrase on each card to form a story; this appears as
a full story underneath the text aligned to each im-
age. additionally, this interface captures the align-
ments between text and photos. workers may skip
an album if it does not seem storyable (e.g., a col-
lection of coins). albums skipped by two workers
are discarded. the interface of re-telling is simi-
lar, but it displays the two photo sequences already
created in the    rst stage, which the worker chooses
from to write the story. for each album, 2 work-
ers perform storytelling (at $0.3/hit), and 3 work-
ers perform re-telling (at $0.25/hit), yielding a total
of 1,907 workers. all hits use quality controls to
ensure varied text at least 15 words long.
id104 descriptions of images in iso-
lation & images in sequence we also use
id104 to collect descriptions of images-
in-isolation (dii) and descriptions of images-in-
sequence (dis), for the photo sequences with sto-
ries from a majority of workers in the    rst task (as
figure 2). in both dii and dis tasks, workers are

table 2: a summary of our dataset, following the pro-
posed analyses of ferraro et al. (2015), including the fra-
zier and yngve measures of syntactic complexity. the
balanced brown corpus (marcus et al., 1999), provided
for comparison, contains only text. perplexity (ppl) is
calculated against a 5-gram language model learned on a
generic 30b english words dataset scraped from the web.

table 3: top words ranked by normalized pmi.

asked to follow the instructions for image caption-
ing proposed in ms coco (lin et al., 2014) such
as describe all the important parts. in dii, we use
the ms coco image captioning interface.4 in dis,
we use the storyboard and story cards of our story-
telling interface to display a photo sequence, with
ms coco instructions adapted for sequences. we
recruit 3 workers for dii (at $0.05/hit) and 3 work-
ers for dis (at $0.07/hit).

all

tokenize

data post-processing we
sto-
rylets and descriptions with the corenlp tok-
enizer, and replace all people names with generic
male/female tokens,5 and all identi   ed named
entities with their entity type (e.g., location).
the data is released as training, validation, and test
following an 80%/10%/10% split on the stories-in-
sequence albums. example language from each tier
is shown in figure 4.

4 data analysis

our dataset
includes 10,117 flickr albums with
210,819 unique photos. each album on average has
20.8 photos (   = 9.0). the average time span of each
album is 7.9 hours (   = 11.4). further details of each
tier of the dataset are shown in table 2.6

4https://github.com/tylin/coco-ui
5we use those names occurring at

least 10,000 times.

https://ssa.gov/oact/babynames/names.zip

6we exclude words seen only once.

dii a black frisbee is sitting on top of a roof. a man playing soccer outside of a white house with a red door. the boy is throwing a soccer ball by the red door. a soccer ball is over a roof by a frisbee in a rain gutter. two balls and a frisbee are on top of a roof. a roof top with a black frisbee laying on the top of the edge of it. a man is standing in the grass in front of the house kicking a soccer ball.  a man is in the front of the house throwing a soccer ball up.  a blue and white soccer ball and black frisbee are on the edge of the roof top. two soccer balls and a frisbee are sitting on top of the roof top. a discus got stuck up on the roof. why not try getting it down with a soccer ball? up the soccer ball goes.  it didn't work so we tried a volley ball. now the discus, soccer ball, and volleyball are all stuck on the roof. dis sis data set #(txt, img) pairs (k) vocab size (k) avg. #tok %abs frazier yngve ppl brown 52.1 47.7 20.8 15.2% 18.5 77.2 194.0 dii 151.8 13.8 11.0 21.3% 10.3 27.4 147.0 dis 151.8 5.0 9.8 24.8% 9.2 23.7 146.8 sis 252.9 18.2 10.2 22.1% 10.5 27.5 116.0 5 man sitting  black chatting amount trunk went [female] see woman white    large gentleman goers facing got today saw standing two front enjoys sofa bench [male] decided came holding young group folks egg enjoying took really started wearing image shoreline female great time desc.-in-iso. desc.-in-seq. story-in-seq. man woman standing holding wearing we use normalized pointwise mutual information
to identify the words most closely associated with
each tier (table 3). top words for descriptions-
in-isolation re   ect an impoverished disambiguat-
ing context: references to people often lack so-
cial speci   city, as people are referred to as simply
   man    or    woman   . single images often do not
convey much information about underlying events
or actions, which leads to the abundant use of pos-
ture verbs (   standing   ,    sitting   , etc.). as we turn to
descriptions-in-sequence,
these relatively uninfor-
mative words are much less represented. finally, top
story-in-sequence words include more storytelling
elements, such as names ([male]), temporal refer-
ences (today) and words that are more dynamic and
abstract (went, decided).

5 automatic evaluation metric

given the nature of the complex storytelling task,
the best and most reliable evaluation for assessing
the quality of generated stories is human judgment.
however, automatic id74 are useful to
quickly benchmark progress. to better understand
which metric could serve as a proxy for human eval-
uation, we compute pairwise correlation coef   cients
between automatic metrics and human judgments on
3,000 stories sampled from the sis training set.

for the human judgements, we again use crowd-
sourcing on mturk, asking    ve judges per story to
rate how strongly they agreed with the statement    if
these were my photos, i would like using a story like
this to share my experience with my friends   .7 we
take the average of the    ve judgments as the    nal
score for the story. for the automatic metrics, we use
meteor,8 smoothed-id7 (lin and och, 2004),
and skip-thoughts (kiros et al., 2015) to compute
similarity between each story for a given sequence.
skip-thoughts provide a sentence2vec embedding
which models the semantic space of novels.

as table 4 shows, meteor correlates best with
human judgment according to all the correlation co-
ef   cients. this signals that a metric such as me-
teor which incorporates id141 correlates
best with human judgement on this task. a more

7scale presented ranged from    strongly disagree    to

   strongly agree   , which we convert to a scale of 1 to 5.
8we use meteor version 1.5 with hter weights.

meteor
0.22 (2.8e-28)
0.20 (3.0e-31)
0.14 (1.0e-33)

r
  
  
table 4: correlations of automatic scores against human
judgements, with p-values in parentheses.

skip-thoughts
0.18 (5.0e-27)
0.16 (6.4e-22)
0.11 (7.7e-24)

id7
0.08 (1.0e-06)
0.08 (8.9e-06)
0.06 (8.7e-08)

beam=10 greedy
23.55

19.10

-dups +grounded
19.21

   

table 6: captions generated per-image with meteor
scores.

detailed study of automatic evaluation of stories is
an area of interest for a future work.

6 baseline experiments

we report baseline experiments on the storytelling
task in table 7, training on the sis tier and testing
on half the sis validation set (valtest). example out-
put from each system is presented in table 5. to
highlight some differences between story and cap-
tion generation, we also train on the dii tier in iso-
lation, and produce captions per-image, rather than
in sequence. these results are shown in table 7.

to train the story generation model, we use a
sequence-to-sequence recurrent neural net (id56)
approach, which naturally extends the single-image
captioning technique of devlin et al. (2015) and
vinyals et al. (2014) to multiple images. here, we
encode an image sequence by running an id56 over
the fc7 vectors of each image, in reverse order. this
is used as the initial hidden state to the story decoder
model, which learns to produce the story one word
at a time using softmax loss over the training data
vocabulary. we use id149 (grus)
(cho et al., 2014) for both the image encoder and
story decoder.

in the baseline system, we generate the story us-
ing a simple id125 (size=10), which has been
successful in image captioning previously (devlin et
al., 2015). however, for story generation, the re-
sults of this model subjectively appear to be very
poor     the system produces generic, repetitive, high-
level descriptions (e.g.,    this is a picture of a dog   ).

beam=10 greedy
23.13
table 7: stories baselines with meteor scores.

-dups +grounded
30.11

27.76

31.42

+viterbi this is a picture of a family. this is a picture of a cake. this is a picture of a dog. this is a

picture of a beach. this is a picture of a beach.

+greedy the family gathered together for a meal. the food was delicious. the dog was excited to be

there. the dog was enjoying the water. the dog was happy to be in the water.

-dups the family gathered together for a meal. the food was delicious. the dog was excited to be

there. the kids were playing in the water. the boat was a little too much to drink.

+grounded the family got together for a cookout. they had a lot of delicious food. the dog was happy to

be there. they had a great time on the beach. they even had a swim in the water.

table 5: example stories generated by baselines.

this is a predictable result given the label bias prob-
lem inherent in maximum likelihood training; recent
work has looked at ways to address this issue di-
rectly (li et al., 2016).

to establish a stronger baseline, we explore sev-
eral decode-time heuristics to improve the quality of
the generated story. the    rst heuristic is to lower
the decoder beam size substantially. we    nd that
using a beam size of 1 (greedy search) signi   cantly
increases the story quality, resulting in a 4.6 gain in
meteor score. however, the same effect is not
seen for id134, with the greedy caption
model obtaining worse quality than the id125
model. this highlights a key difference in generat-
ing stories versus generating captions.

although the stories produced using a greedy
search result in signi   cant gains, they include many
repeated words and phrases, e.g.,    the kids had a
great time. and the kids had a great time.    we intro-
duce a very simple heuristic to avoid this, where the
same content word cannot be produced more than
once within a given story. this improves meteor
by another 2.3 points.

an advantage of comparing captioning to story-
telling side-by-side is that the captioning output may
be used to help inform the storytelling output. to
this end, we include an additional baseline where
   visually grounded    words may only be produced
if they are licensed by the caption model. we de   ne
the set of visually grounded words to be those which
occurred at higher frequency in the caption training
than the story training:

p (w|tcaption)
p (w|tstory)

> 1.0

(1)

we train a separate model using the caption an-
notations, and produce an n-best list of captions for
each image in the valtest set. words seen in at
least 10 sentences in the 100-best list are marked
as    licensed    by the caption model. greedy decod-
ing without duplication proceeds with the additional
constraint that if a word is visually grounded, it can
only be generated by the story model if it is licensed
by the caption model for the same photo set. this
results in a further 1.3 meteor improvement.

it is interesting to note what a strong effect rel-
atively simple heuristics have on the generated sto-
ries. we do not intend to suggest that these heuris-
tics are the right way to approach story generation.
instead, the main purpose is to provide clear base-
lines that demonstrate that story generation has fun-
damentally different challenges from caption gener-
ation; and the space is wide open to explore for train-
ing and decoding methods to generate    uent stories.

7 conclusion and future work
we have introduced the    rst dataset for sequen-
tial vision-to-language, which incrementally moves
from images-in-isolation to stories-in-sequence. we
argue that modelling the more    gurative and so-
cial language captured in this dataset is essential for
evolving ai towards more human-like understand-
ing. we have established several strong baselines
for the task of visual storytelling, and have moti-
vated meteor as an automatic metric to evaluate
progress on this task moving forward.

references

stanislaw antol, aishwarya agrawal, jiasen lu, mar-
garet mitchell, dhruv batra, c. lawrence zitnick, and
devi parikh. 2015. vqa: visual question answer-
ing. in international conference on id161
(iccv).

jianfu chen, polina kuznetsova, david warren, and
yejin choi. 2015. d  ej`a image-captions: a corpus of
expressive descriptions in repetition. in proceedings
of the 2015 conference of the north american chapter
of the association for computational linguistics: hu-
man language technologies, pages 504   514, denver,
colorado, may   june. association for computational
linguistics.

kyunghyun cho, bart van merrienboer, caglar gulcehre,
fethi bougares, holger schwenk, and yoshua ben-
gio.
2014. learning phrase representations using
id56 encoder-decoder for statistical machine transla-
tion. corr.

jacob devlin, hao cheng, hao fang, saurabh gupta,
li deng, xiaodong he, geoffrey zweig, and margaret
mitchell. 2015. language models for image caption-
in proceedings of
ing: the quirks and what works.
the 53rd annual meeting of the association for com-
putational linguistics and the 7th international joint
conference on natural language processing (volume
2: short papers), pages 100   105, beijing, china, july.
association for computational linguistics.

desmond elliott and frank keller. 2013. image descrip-
tion using visual dependency representations. in pro-
ceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical meth-
ods in natural language processing, pages 1292   
1302, seattle, washington, usa, october. association
for computational linguistics.

hao fang, saurabh gupta, forrest n. iandola, ru-
pesh srivastava, li deng, piotr doll  ar, jianfeng
gao, xiaodong he, margaret mitchell, john c. platt,
c. lawrence zitnick, and geoffrey zweig.
2015.
from captions to visual concepts and back. in com-
puter vision and pattern recognition (cvpr).

francis ferraro, nasrin mostafazadeh, ting-hao k.
huang, lucy vanderwende, jacob devlin, michel gal-
ley, and margaret mitchell. 2015. a survey of cur-
rent datasets for vision and language research. in pro-
ceedings of the 2015 conference on empirical meth-
ods in natural language processing, pages 207   213,
lisbon, portugal, september. association for compu-
tational linguistics.

haoyuan gao, junhua mao, jie zhou, zhiheng huang,
lei wang, and wei xu. 2015. are you talking to
a machine? dataset and methods for multilingual im-
age question. in c. cortes, n.d. lawrence, d.d. lee,

m. sugiyama, r. garnett, and r. garnett, editors, ad-
vances in neural information processing systems 28,
pages 2287   2295. curran associates, inc.

andrej karpathy and li fei-fei. 2015. deep visual-
semantic alignments for generating image descrip-
in the ieee conference on id161
tions.
and pattern recognition (cvpr), june.

ryan kiros, yukun zhu, ruslan r salakhutdinov,
richard zemel, raquel urtasun, antonio torralba,
and sanja fidler. 2015. skip-thought vectors.
in
c. cortes, n.d. lawrence, d.d. lee, m. sugiyama,
r. garnett, and r. garnett, editors, advances in neu-
ral information processing systems 28, pages 3276   
3284. curran associates, inc.

ranjay krishna, yuke zhu, oliver groth, justin johnson,
kenji hata, joshua kravitz, stephanie chen, yannis
kalanditis, li-jia li, david a shamma, michael bern-
stein, and li fei-fei. 2016. visual genome: connect-
ing language and vision using crowdsourced dense im-
age annotations.

jiwei li, michel galley, chris brockett, jianfeng gao,
and bill dolan. 2016. a diversity-promoting objec-
tive function for neural conversation models. naacl
hlt 2016.

chin-yew lin and franz josef och. 2004. automatic
evaluation of machine translation quality using longest
common subsequence and skip-bigram statistics.
in
proceedings of the 42nd annual meeting on associa-
tion for computational linguistics, acl    04, strouds-
burg, pa, usa. association for computational lin-
guistics.

tsung-yi lin, michael maire, serge belongie, james
hays, pietro perona, deva ramanan, piotr doll  ar, and
c lawrence zitnick. 2014. microsoft coco: common
objects in context. in id161   eccv 2014,
pages 740   755. springer.

mateusz malinowski and mario fritz. 2014. a multi-
world approach to id53 about real-
world scenes based on uncertain input. in z. ghahra-
mani, m. welling, c. cortes, n.d. lawrence, and k.q.
weinberger, editors, advances in neural information
processing systems 27, pages 1682   1690. curran as-
sociates, inc.

christopher d. manning, mihai surdeanu, john bauer,
jenny finkel, steven j. bethard, and david mcclosky.
2014. the stanford corenlp natural language pro-
cessing toolkit. in proceedings of 52nd annual meet-
ing of the association for computational linguistics:
system demonstrations, pages 55   60.

mitchell marcus, beatrice santorini, mary ann
marcinkiewicz, and ann taylor. 1999. brown corpus,
treebank-3.

vignesh ramanathan, percy liang, and li fei-fei. 2013.
video event understanding using natural language de-
scriptions. in id161 (iccv), 2013 ieee in-
ternational conference on, pages 905   912. ieee.

mengye ren, ryan kiros, and richard zemel. 2015. ex-
ploring models and data for image id53.
in c. cortes, n.d. lawrence, d.d. lee, m. sugiyama,
r. garnett, and r. garnett, editors, advances in neu-
ral information processing systems 28, pages 2935   
2943. curran associates, inc.

mohammad amin sadeghi and ali farhadi.

2011.
recognition using visual phrases. in id161
and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2011 ieee confer-
ence on, pages 1745   1752. ieee.

bart thomee, david a shamma, gerald friedland, ben-
jamin elizalde, karl ni, douglas poland, damian
borth, and li-jia li. 2015. the new data and new
arxiv preprint
challenges in multimedia research.
arxiv:1503.01817.

oriol vinyals, alexander toshev, samy bengio, and du-
mitru erhan. 2014. show and tell: a neural image
caption generator. in cvpr.

oriol vinyals, alexander toshev, samy bengio, and du-
mitru erhan. 2015. show and tell: a neural image
in id161 and pattern
caption generator.
recognition.

polly w wiessner. 2014. embers of society: firelight
talk among the ju/hoansi bushmen. proceedings of the
national academy of sciences, 111(39):14027   14035.
kelvin xu, jimmy ba, ryan kiros, kyunghyun cho,
aaron courville, ruslan salakhutdinov, richard
zemel, and yoshua bengio. 2015. show, attend and
tell: neural image id134 with visual at-
tention. arxiv preprint arxiv:1502.03044.

peter young, alice lai, micah hodosh, and julia hock-
enmaier. 2014. from image descriptions to visual
denotations: new similarity metrics for semantic in-
ference over event descriptions. transactions of the
association for computational linguistics, 2:67   78.

