6
1
0
2

 
r
p
a
2
1

 

 
 
]

v
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
2
3
0

.

4
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

attributes as semantic units between
natural language and visual recognition

marcus rohrbach

abstract impressive progress has been made in the    elds of id161 and
natural language processing. however, it remains a challenge to    nd the best point
of interaction for these very different modalities. in this chapter we discuss how
attributes allow us to exchange information between the two modalities and in this
way lead to an interaction on a semantic level. speci   cally we discuss how attributes
allow using knowledge mined from language resources for recognizing novel visual
categories, how we can generate sentence description about images and video, how
we can ground natural language in visual content, and    nally, how we can answer
natural language questions about images.

1 introduction

id161 has made impressive progress in recognizing large number of ob-
jects categories [83], diverse activities [92], and most recently also in describing
images and videos with natural language sentences [91, 89] and answering natu-
ral language questions about images [48]. given suf   cient training data these ap-
proaches can achieve impressive performance, sometimes even on par with humans
[28]. however, humans have two key abilities most id161 system lack. on
the one hand humans can easily generalize to novel categories with no or very little
training data. on the other hand, humans can rely on other modalities, most notably
language, to incorporate knowledge in the recognition process. to do so humans
seem to be able to rely on compositionality and transferability, which means they
can break up complex problems into components, and use previously learned com-
ponents in other (recognition) tasks. in this chapter we discuss how attributes can
form such components which allow to transfer and share knowledge, incorporate
external linguistic knowledge, and decompose the challenging problems of visual

marcus rohrbach
uc berkley eecs and icsi, berkeley, usa

1

2

marcus rohrbach

(a) semantic attributes allow recognition
of novel classes.

(b) sentence description for an image.
image and caption from ms coco [8].

fig. 1 examples for textual descriptions and visual content.

description and id53 into smaller semantic units, which are easier to
recognize and associate with textual representation.

let us    rst illustrate this with two examples. attribute descriptions given in the
form of hierarchical information (a mammal), properties (striped, black, and white),
and similarities, (similar to a horse), allow humans to recognize a visual category,
even if they never observed this category before. given this description in form of
attributes most humans would be able to recognize the animal shown in fig. 1(a)
as a zebra. furthermore, once humans know that fig. 1(a) is a zebra, they can de-
scribe what it is doing within a natural sentence, even if they never saw example
images with captions of zebras before (fig. 1b). a promising way to handle these
challenges is to have compositional models which allow interaction between multi-
modal information at a semantic level.

one prominent way to model such a semantic level are semantic attributes. as the
term    attribute    has a large variety of de   nitions in the id161 literature
we de   ne for the course of this chapter as follows.
de   nition 1. an attribute is a semantic unit, which has a visual and a textual repre-
sentation.

the    rst part of this de   nition, the restriction to a semantic unit is important to
discriminate attributes from other representations, which do not have human inter-
pretable meaning, such as image gradients, bag of (visual) words, or hidden repre-
sentations in deep neural networks. we will refer to these as features. of course for
a speci   c feature, one can try to    nd or associate it with a semantic meaning or unit,
but typically it is unknown and once one is able to identify such a association, one
has found a representation for this semantic attribute. the restriction to a semantic
unit allows to connect to other sources of information on a semantic level, i.e. a level
of meaning. in the second part of the de   nition we restrict it to semantic units which

generationamother zebra feeding her baby in front of a third zebra.semantic attributesproperties: striped, black, whitesimilarities: similar to a horsehierarchical info:a subclass of mammalzebrarecognitionattributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

3

can be both represented textually and visually.1 this this speci   c for this chapter as
we want to exploit the connection between language and visual recognition. from
this de   nition it should also be clear that attributes are not distinct from objects,
but rather that objects are also attributes, as they obviously are semantic and have a
textual and visual representation.

in this chapter we discuss some of the most prominent directions where language
understanding and visual recognition interact. namely how knowledge mined from
language resources can help visual recognition, how we can ground language in
visual content, how we can generate language about visual content, and    nally how
we can answer natural language questions about images, which can be seen as a
combination of grounding the question, recognition, and generating an answer. it
is clear that these directions cannot cover all potential interactions between visual
recognition and language. other directions include generating visual content from
language descriptions [e.g. 102, 45] or localizing images in text i.e. to    nd where
in a text an image is discussed. in the following we    rst analyze challenges for
combining visual and linguistic modalities; afterwards we provide an overview of
this chapter which includes a discussion how the different sections relate to each
other and to the idea of attributes.

1.1 challenges for combining visual and linguistic modalities

one of the fundamental differences between the visual and the linguistic modality
is the level of abstraction. the basic data unit of the visual modality is a (photo-
graphic) image or video which always shows a speci   c instance of a category, or
even more precisely a certain instance for a speci   c viewpoint, lighting, pose, time
etc. for example fig. 1(a) shows one speci   c instance of the category zebra from a
side view, eating grass. in contrast to this, the basic semantic unit of the linguistic
modality are words (which are strings of characters or phonemes for spoken lan-
guage, but we will restrict ourselves to written linguistic expressions in this chap-
ter). although a word might refer to a speci   c instance, the word, i.e. the string,
always represents a category of objects, activities, or attributes, abstracting from a
speci   c instance. interestingly this difference, instance versus category level rep-
resentation, is also what de   nes one of the core challenges in visual recognition
and is also an important topic in computational linguistics. in visual recognition we
are interested in de   ning or learning models which abstract over a speci   c image
or video to understand the visual characteristic of a category. in computational lin-

1 there are attributes / semantic units, which are not visual but textually, e.g. smells, tastes, tactile
sensory inputs, and ones which are visual but not textual, which are naturally dif   cult to describe
in language, but think of many visual patterns beyond striped and dotted, for which we do not
have name, or the different visual attributes between two people or faces which humans can clearly
recognize but which might be dif   cult to put into words. we also like to note that some datasets
such as animals with attributes [44] include non-visual attributes, e.g. smelly, which might still
improve classi   cation performance as they are correlated to visual features.

4

marcus rohrbach

guistics, when automatically parsing a text, we frequently face the inverse challenge
of trying to identify intra and extra linguistic references (co-reference resolution /
grounding2) of a word or phrase. these problems arise because words typically rep-
resent concepts rather than instances and because anaphors, synonyms, hypernyms,
or metaphorical expressions are used to refer to the identical object in the real world.
understanding that the visual and linguistic modalities have different levels of
abstraction is important when trying to combine both modalities. in section 2 we
use linguistic knowledge at category rather than instance level for visual knowledge
transfer, i.e. we use linguistic knowledge at the level where it is most expressive
that is at level of its basic representation. in section 3, when describing visual input
with natural language, we put the point of interaction at a semantic attribute level
and leave concrete realization of sentences to a language model rather than inferring
it from the visual representation, i.e. we recognize the most important components
or attributes of a sentence, which are activities, objects, tools, locations, or scenes
and then generate a sentence based on these. in section 4 we look at a model which
grounds phrases which refer to a speci   c instance by jointly learning visual and
textual representations. in section 5 we answer questions about images by learning
small modules which recognize visual elements which are selected according to the
question and linked to the most important components in the questions, e.g. ques-
tions words/phrases (how many), nouns, (dog) and quali   ers (black. by this com-
position in modules or attributes, we create an architecture, which allows learning
these attributes, which link visual and textual modality, jointly across all questions
and images.

1.2 overview and outline

in this chapter we explain how linguistic knowledge can help to recognize novel
object categories and composite activities (section 2), how attributes help to de-
scribe videos and images with natural language sentences (section 3), how to ground
phrases in images (section 4), and how compositional computation allows for effec-
tive id53 about images (section 5). we conclude with directions for
future work in section 6.

all these directions have in common that attributes form a layer or composi-
tion which is bene   cial for connecting between textual and visual representations.
in section 2, for recognizing novel object categories and composite activities, at-
tributes form the layer where the transfer happens. attributes are shared across
known and novel categories, while information mined from different language re-
sources is able to provide the associations between the know categories and at-
tributes at training time to learn attribute classi   ers and between the attributes and
novel categories at test time to recognize the novel categories.

2 co-reference is when two or more words refer to the same thing or person within text, while
grounding looks at how words refer to things outside text, e.g. images.

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

5

when describing images and videos (section 3), we    rst learn an intermediate
layer of attribute classi   ers, which are then used to generate natural language de-
scriptions. this intermediate layer allows us to reason across sentences at a semantic
level and in this way to build a model which generates consistent multi-sentence de-
scription. furthermore, we discuss how such an attribute classi   er layer allows us
to describe novel categories where no paired image-caption data is available.

when grounding sentences in images, we argue that it makes sense to do this
on a level of phrases are rather full sentences, as phrases form semantic units, or
attributes, which can be well localized in images. thus, in section 4 we discuss how
we localize short phrases or referential expressions in images.

in section 5 we discuss the task of visual id53 which connects
these previous sections, as one has to ground the question in the image and then
predict or generate an answer. here we show how we can decompose the question
into attributes which are in this case small neural network components, which are
composed in a computation graph to predict the answer. this allows us to share and
train the attributes across questions and images, but build a neural network which is
speci   c for a given question.

the order of the following sections weakly follows the historic development,
where we start with work which appeared at the time when attributes started to
become popular in id161 [43, 18]. and the last section on visual question
answering, a problem which requires more complex interactions between language
and visual recognition, has only recently become a topic in the id161
community [48, 4].

2 linguistic knowledge for recognition of novel categories

while supervised training is an integral part of building visual, textual, or multi-
modal category models, more recently, knowledge transfer between categories has
been recognized as an important ingredient to scale to a large number of categories
as well as to enable    ne-grained categorization. this development re   ects the psy-
chological point of view that humans are able to generalize to novel3 categories with
only a few training samples [56, 6]. this has recently gained increased interest in
the id161 and machine learning literature, which look at zero-shot recog-
nition (with no training instances for a class) [44, 17, 58, 59, 22, 53, 21], and one- or
few-shot recognition [85, 6, 61]. knowledge transfer is particularly bene   cial when
scaling to large numbers of classes where training data is limited [53, 21, 70], dis-
tinguishing    ne-grained categories [19, 13], or analyzing compositional activities in
videos [22, 72].

recognizing categories with no or only few labeled training instances is chal-
lenging. in this section we    rst discuss how we can build attribute classi   ers using

3 we use    novel    throughout this chapter to denote categories with no or few labeled training
instances.

marcus rohrbach

6

fig. 2 zero-shot recognition
with the direct attribute pre-
diction model [43] allows
recognizing unseen classes z
using an intermediate layer
of attributes a. instead of
manually de   ned associations
between classes and attributes
(cyan lines), rohrbach et al.
[69] reduce supervision by
mining object-attribute as-
sociation from language re-
sources, such as wikipedia,
id138, and image or web
search.

only category-labeled image data and different language resources which allow rec-
ognize novel categories (section 2.1). and then, to further improve this transfer
learning approach, we discuss how to additionally integrate instance similarity and
labeled instances of the novel classes if available (section 2.2). furthermore we
discuss what changes have to be made to apply similar ideas to composite activity
recognition (section 2.3).

2.1 semantic relatedness mined from language resources for

zero-shot recognition

lampert et al. [43, 44] propose to use attribute based recognition to allow recog-
nizing unseen categories based on their object-attribute associations. their direct
attribute prediction (dap) model is visualized in fig. 2. given images which are
labeled with known category labels y and object-attribute associations ay
m between
categories and attributes, we can learn attribute classi   er p(am|xi) for an image xi.
this allows to recognize novel categories z if we have associations az
m.

to scale the approach to a larger number of classes and attributes, rohrbach
et al. [69, 73, 70] show how these previously manual de   ned attribute associations
ay
m and az
m can be replaced with associations mined automatically from different
language resources. table 1(a) compares several language resources and measures
to estimate semantic relatedness to determine if a class should be associated with a
speci   c attribute. yahoo snippets [7, 73], which computes co-occurrence statistics
on summary snippets returned by search engines, shows the best performance of
all single measures. rohrbach et al. [73] also discuss several fusion strategies to
get more robust measures by expanding the attribute inventory with id91 and
combining several measures, which can achieve performance on par with manually
de   ned associations (second last versus last line in table 1a).

	
       #known   classesattributeclassifiers        &    (	
       #	
   spots	
       )	
   white	
       *	
   ocean	
       +	
       )	
       *	
       ,...	
       #novel   classes	
       )	
       *	
       .......semantic   relatednessfrom   languageid138attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

7

measure
lin measure [46]

language resource
id138 [20], path
yahoo web, hit count [54] dice coef. [11, 82]
dice coef. [11, 82]
flickr img, hit count [69]
dice coef. [11, 82]
yahoo img, hit count [69]
esa [23, 98]
wikipedia [69]
dice/snippets [73]
yahoo snippets [7]
yahoo img
expanded attr.
classi   er fusion
combination
combination
expanded attr.
manual [43]

in
[69]
[69]
[69]
[69]
[69]
[73]
[73]
[73]
[73]
[73]

auc
60.5
60.4
70.1
71.0
69.7
76.0
77.2
75.9
79.5
79.2

images:

test

auc
+ train cls   

73.2 ( +2.2 )
78.9 ( -0.6 )
79.4 ( +0.2 )

71.0
79.5
79.2

object - attribute associations
yahoo img
classi   er fusion
manual
direct similarity
yahoo img
classi   er fusion
    effect of adding images from
known classes in the test set as dis-
tractors/negatives.

79.9
75.9

76.4 ( -2.5 )
72.3 ( -3.6 )

(a) attribute-based zero-shot recognition.

(b) attributes versus direct-similarity,
reported in [73].

table 1 zero-shot recognition on awa dataset [43]. results for different language resources to
mine association. trained on 92 images per class, mean area under the roc curve (auc) in %.

as an alternative to attributes, rohrbach et al. [69] also propose to directly trans-
fer information from most similar classes which does not require and intermediate
level of attributes. while this achieves higher performance when the test set only
contains novel objects, in the more adversarial settings, when the test set also con-
tains images from the known categories, the direct similarity based approach signif-
icantly drops in performance as can be seen in table 1(b).

rohrbach et al. [70] extend zero-shot recognition from the 10 unseen categories
in the awa dataset to a setting of 200 unseen id163 [9] categories. one of
the main challenges in this setting is, that there are no pre-de   ned attributes on this
dataset available. rohrbach et al. propose to mine part-attributes from id138 [20]
as id163 categories correspond to id138 synsets. additionally, as the known
and unknown classes are leaf nodes of the id163 hierarchy, inner nodes can be
used to group leaf nodes, similar to attributes. also, the closest known leaf node
categories can transfer to the corresponding unseen leaf category.

an alternative approach is devise [21] which learns an embedding into a se-
mantic skip-gram word-space [55], trained on wikipedia documents. classi   cation
is achieved by projecting an image in the word-space and taking the closest word as
label. consequently this also allows for zero-shot recognition.

table 2 compares the different approaches. the hierarchical variants [70] per-
forms best, also compared to devise [21] which relies on more powerful id98
[42] features. further improvements can be achieved by metric learning [53]. as
a different application, mrowca et al. [57] show how such hierarchical semantic
knowledge allows to improve large scale id164 not just classi   cation.
while the id138 hierarchy is very reliable as it was manually created, the at-
tributes are restricted to part attributes and the mining is not as reliably. to improve
in this challenging setting, we discuss next how one can exploit instance similarity
and few labeled examples if available.

8

marcus rohrbach

approach/language resource
hierarchy
leaf id138 nodes
inner id138 nodes
all id138 nodes
+ metric learning
part attributes
wikipedia
yahoo holonyms
yahoo image
yahoo snippets
all attributes
direct similarity
wikipedia
yahoo web
yahoo image
yahoo snippets
all measures
label embedding
devise

in

top-5 error

[69]
[69]
[69]
[53]

[69]
[69]
[69]
[69]
[69]

[69]
[69]
[69]
[69]
[69]

[21]

72.8
66.7
65.2
64.3   

80.9
77.3
81.4
76.2
70.3

75.6
69.3
72.0
75.5
66.6

68.2   

table 2 large scale zero-shot recognition results. flat error in % and hierarchical error in brackets.
   note that [53, 21] report on a different set of unseen classes than [69].

transferring knowledge from known categories to novel classes is challenging as
it is dif   cult to estimate visual properties of the novel classes. approaches discussed
in the previous section can not exploit instance similarity or few labeled instances,
if available. the approach propagated semantic transfer (pst) [74] combines four
ideas to jointly handle the challenging scenario of recognizing novel categories.
first, pst transfers information from known to novel categories by incorporating
external knowledge, such as linguistic or expert-speci   ed information, e.g., by a
mid-level layer of semantic attributes as discussed in section 2.1. second, pst ex-
ploits the manifold structure of novel classes similar to unsupervised learning ap-
proaches [94, 80]. more speci   cally it adapts the graph-based label propagation
algorithm [101, 100]     previously used only for semi-supervised learning [14]    
to zero-shot and few-shot learning. in this transductive setting information is prop-
agated between instances of the novel classes to get more reliable recognition as
visualized with the red graph in fig. 3. third, pst improves the local neighborhood
in such graph structures by replacing the raw feature-based representation with a
semantic object- or attribute-based representation. and forth, pst generalizes from
zero- to few-shot learning by integrating labeled training examples as certain nodes
in its graph based propagation. another positive aspect of pst is that attribute or
category models do not have to be retrained if novel classes are added which can be
an important aspect e.g. in a robotic scenario.

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

9

fig. 3 recognition of novel
categories. the approach
propagated semantic trans-
fer [74] combines knowledge
transferred via attributes from
known classes (left) with few
labeled examples in graph
(red lines) which is build ac-
cording to instance similarity.

2.2 propagated semantic transfer

fig. 4 shows results on the awa [43] dataset. we note that in contrast to the pre-
vious section the classi   ers are trained on all training examples, not only 92 per
class. fig. 4(a) shows zero-shot results, where no training examples are available for
the novel or in this case unseen classes. the table compares pst with propagating
on a graph based on attribute-classi   er similarity versus image descriptor similar-
ity and shows a clear bene   t of the former. this variant also outperform dap and
iap [44] as well as zero-shot learning [22]. next we compare pst in the few-
shot setting, i.e. we add labeled examples per class. in fig. 4(b) we compare pst
to two label propagation (lp) baselines [14]. we    rst note that pst (red curves)
seaid113ssly moves from zero-shot to few-shot, while traditional lp (blue and black
curves) needs at least one training example. we    rst examine the three solid lines.
the black curve is the best lp variant from ebert et al. [14] and uses similarity based
image features. lp in combination with the similarity metric based on the attribute
classi   er scores (blue curves) allows to transfer knowledge residing in the classi   er
trained on the known classes and gives a signi   cant improvement in performance.
pst (red curve) additionally transfers labels from the known classes and improves
further. the dashed lines in fig. 4(b) provide results for automatically mined asso-
ciations between attributes and classes from language resources. it is interesting to
note that these automatically mined associations achieve performance very close to
the manual de   ned associations (dashed vs. solid).

fig. 5 shows results on the classi   cation task with 200 unseen id163 cate-
gories. in fig. 5(a) we compare pst to zero-shot without propagation presented as
discussed in section 2.1. for zero-shot recognition pst (red bars) improves perfor-
mance over zero-shot without propagation (black bars) for all language resources
and transfer variants. similar to the awa dataset, pst also improves over the lp-
baseline for few-shot recognition (fig. 5b). the missing lp-baseline on raw features
is due to the fact that for the large number of images and high dimensional features

	
       #known	
   classesattributeclassifiers        &    (	
       #	
   spots	
       )	
   white	
       *	
   ocean	
       +	
       )	
       *	
       ,...	
       #novel	
   classes	
       )	
       *	
       .......id138semantic	
   relatednessfrom	
   language10

marcus rohrbach

approach
dap [44]
iap [44]
zero-shot learning [22]
pst [74]

on image descriptors
on attributes

performance
auc acc.
81.4
41.4
42.2
80.0
n/a
41.3

81.2
83.7

40.5
42.7

(a) zero-shot, in %.

(b) few-shot

fig. 4 zero-shot results on awa dataset. predictions with attributes and manual de   ned associa-
tions. adapted from [74].

(a) zero-shot recognition

(b) few-shot recognition

fig. 5 results on 200 unseen classes of id163. adapted from [74].

the graph construction is very time and memory consuming if not infeasible. in con-
trast, the attribute representation is very compact and thus computational tractable
even with a large number of images.

2.3 composite activity recognition with attributes and script data

understanding activities in visual and textual data is generally regarded as more
challenging than understanding object categories due to the limited training data,
challenges in de   ning the extend of an activity, and the similarities between activ-
ities [62]. however, long-term composite activities can be decomposed in shorter
   ne-grained activities [72]. consider for example the composite cooking activities
prepare scrambled egg which can be decomposed in attributes of    ne-grained ac-
tivities (e.g. open, fry), ingredients (e.g. egg), and tools (e.g. pan, spatula). these
attributes can than be shared and transferred across composite activities as visual-
ized in fig. 6 using the same approaches as for objects and attributes discussed in
the previous section. however, the representations, both on the visual and on the
language side have to change. fine-grained activities and associated attributes are

010203040503035404550# training samples per classmean acc in %  pst (ours)     manual def. ass.lp + attr. classifiers     manual ass.pst (ours)     yahoo image attr.lp + attr. classifiers     yahoo img attr.lp (ebert et al, 2010)0102030hierachy     leaf nodeshierachy     inner nodesattributes     wikipediaattributes     yahoo holonymsattributes     yahoo imageattributes     yahoo snippetsdirect similarity     wikipediadirect similarity     yahoo webdirect similarity     yahoo imagedirect similarity     yahoo snippetstop   5 accuracy (in %)  zero   shot w/o propagationpst (ours)0510152030354045505560# training samples per classtop   5 accurracy in %  pst (ours)     hierachy (inner nodes)pst (ours)     yahoo img directlp + object classifiersattributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

11

fig. 6 recognizing compos-
ite activities using attributes
and script data.

visually characterized by    ne-grained body motions and low inter-class variability.
in addition to holistic features [92], one consequently should exploit human pose-
based [71] and hand-centric [77] features. as the previously discussed language
resources do not provide good associations between composite activities and their
attributes, rohrbach et al. [72] collected textual description (script data) of these
activities with amt. from this script data associations can be computed based on
either the frequency statistics or, more discriminate, by term frequency times inverse
document frequency (tf   idf).

table 3 shows results on the mpii cooking 2 dataset [76]. comparing the    rst
column (holistic dense trajectory features [92]) with the second, shows the bene-
   t of adding the more semantic hand-[77] and pose-[71] features. comparing line
(1) with line (2) or (3) shows the bene   t of representing composite activities with
attributes as this allows sharing across composite activities. best performance is
achieved with 57.4% mean ap in line (6) when combining compositional attributes
with the propagated semantic transfer (pst) approach (see section 2.2) and script
data to determine associations between composites and attributes.

3 image and video description using compositional attributes

in this section we discuss how we can generate natural language sentences describ-
ing visual content, rather than just giving labels to images and videos as discussed
in the previous section. this intriguing task has recently received increased atten-
tion in id161 and computational linguistics communities [89, 90, 91] and
has a large number of potential applications including human robot interaction, im-
age and video retrieval, and describing visual content for visually impaired people.
in this section we focus on approaches which decouple the visual recognition and
the sentence generation and introduce an intermediate semantic layer, which can be
seen a layer of attributes (section 3.1). introducing such a semantic layer has sev-
eral advantages. first, this allows to reason across sentences on a semantic level,
which is, as we will see, bene   cial for multi-sentence description of videos (sec-

	
       #attributeclassifiersegg	
   panopen	
       %	
       &	
          ...	
       #	
       )......script   datafryknown   training   compositestest   compositesprepare   onionseparate   eggprepare   scrambled   egg.   .   .12

marcus rohrbach

attribute training on:

all

composites

disjoint

composites

activity representation:
with training data for composites
without attributes

[92] [92, 77, 71]

attributes on gt intervals

(1) id166

(2) id166

attributes on automatic segmentation

39.8

43.6

49.0
42.1
35.0
54.5

41.1

52.3

56.9
43.3
40.4
57.4

(3) id166
(4) nn
(5) nn+script data
(6) pst+script data

no training data for composites
attributes on automatic segmentation

(7) script data
(8) pst + script data

36.7
36.6

29.9
43.8

[92] [92, 77, 71]

-

32.3

35.7
24.7
18.0
32.2

-

34.9

34.8
32.7
21.9
32.5

19.6
21.1

21.9
19.3

table 3 composite cooking activity classi   cation on mpii cooking 2 [76], mean ap in %. top
left quarter: fully supervised, right column: reduced attribute training data, bottom section: no
composite cooking activity training data, right bottom quarter: true zero shot. adapted from [76].

tion 3.2). second, we can show that when learning reliable attributes, this leads to
state-of-the-art sentences generation with high diversity in the challenging scenario
of movie description (section 3.3). third, this leads to a compositional structure
which allows describing novel concepts in images and videos (section 3.4).

3.1 translating image and video content to natural language

descriptions

to address the problem of image and video description, rohrbach et al. [75] pro-
pose a two-step translation approach which    rst predicts an intermediate semantic
attribute layer and then learns how to translate from this semantic representation to
natural sentences. figure 7 gives an overview of this two-step approach for videos.
first, a rich semantic representation of the visual content including e.g. object and
activity attributes is predicted. to predict the semantic representation a crf models
the relationships between different attributes of the visual input. and second, the
generation of natural language is formulated as a machine translation problem us-
ing the semantic representation as source language and the generated sentences as
target language. for this a parallel corpus of videos, annotated semantic attributes,
and textual descriptions allows to adapt id151 (smt) [39]
to translate between the two languages. rohrbach et al. train and evaluate their ap-

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

13

fig. 7 video description. overview of the two-step translation approach [75] with an intermediate
semantic layer of attributes (sr) for describing videos with natural language. from [68].

proach on the videos of the mpii cooking dataset [71, 72] and the aligned descrip-
tions from the tacos corpus [62]. according to automatic evaluation and human
judgments, the two-step translation approach signi   cantly outperforms retrieval and
id165-based baseline approaches, motivated by prior work. this similarly can be
applied to image description task, however, in both cases it requires an annotated
semantic attribute representation. in sections 3.3 and 3.4 we discuss how we can
extract such attribute annotations automatically from sentences. an alternative ap-
proach is presented by fang et al. [16] who mine visual concepts for image descrip-
tion by integrating multiple instance learning [52]. similar to the work presented
in the following, wu et al. [95] learn an intermediate attribute representation from
the image descriptions. captions are then generated solely from the intermediate
attribute representation.

3.2 coherent multi-sentence video description with variable level

of detail

most approaches for automatic video description, including the one presented
above, focus on generating single sentence descriptions and are not able to vary the
descriptions    level of detail. one advantage of the two-step approach with an explicit
intermediate layer of semantic attributes is that it allows to reason on this semantic
level. to generate coherent multi-sentence descriptions, rohrbach et al. [64] extend
the two-step translation approach to model across-sentence consistency at the se-
mantic level by enforcing a consistent topic, which is the prepared dish in the cook-
ing scenario. to produce shorter or one-sentence summaries, rohrbach et al. select
the most relevant sentences on the semantic level by using tf   idf (term frequency
times inverse document frequency). for an example output on the tacos multi-
level corpus [64] see figure 8. in order to fully automatically do multi-sentence
description, rohrbach et al. propose a simple but effective method based on ag-
glomerative id91 to perform automatic video segmentation. the most impor-
tant component of good id91 is the similarity measure and it turns out that

dense trajectories (wang et al., 2013) input video (cropped for display) activity tool source target object attribute classifier  score vectors crf bow hist sematic representation (sr) activitytoolobjectsourcetarget id166 model dependencies  with crf decode word and phrase-alginment language model reordering model optimized with moses (koehn et al., 2007)  take  out  hand   knife  drawer the person  gets  out  a knife  from the drawer gets  out  the person  a knife  the drawer the person  gets  out  a knife  the drawer output description concatenate 14

marcus rohrbach

detailed:

short:

one sentence:

a man took a cutting board and knife from the drawer. he took out an orange
from the refrigerator. then, he took a knife from the drawer. he juiced one half
of the orange. next, he opened the refrigerator. he cut the orange with the knife.
the man threw away the skin. he got a glass from the cabinet. then, he poured
the juice into the glass. finally, he placed the orange in the sink.
a man juiced the orange. next, he cut the orange in half. finally, he poured the
juice into a glass.
a man juiced the orange.

fig. 8 coherent multi-sentence descriptions at three levels of detail, using automatic temporal
segmentation. see section 3.2 for details. from [64].

the semantic attribute classi   ers (see fig. 7) are very well suited for that in con-
trast to bag-of-words dense trajectories [93]. this con   rm the observation made in
section 2.2 that attribute classi   ers seem to form a good space for distance compu-
tations.

to improve performance, donahue et al. [12] show that the second step, the smt-
based sentence generation, can be replaced with a deep recurrent network to better
model visual uncertainty, but still relying on the multi-sentence reasoning on the
semantic level. on the tacos multi-level corpus this achieves 28.8% id7@4,
compared to 26.9% [64] with smt and 24.9% with smt without multi-sentence
reasoning [75].

3.3 describing movies with an intermediate layer of attributes

two challenges arise, when extending the idea presented above to movie descrip-
tion [67], which looks at the problem how to describe movies for blind people. first,
and maybe more importantly, there are no semantic attributes annotated as on the
kitchen data, and second, the data is more visually diverse and challenging. for the
   rst challenge, rohrbach et al. [67] propose to extract attribute labels from the de-
scription to train visual classi   ers to build a semantic intermediate layer by relying
on a id29 approach of the description. to additionally accommodate
the second challenge of increased visual dif   culty, rohrbach et al. [66] show how
to improve the robustness of these attributes or    visual labels    by three steps. first,
by distinguishing three semantic groups of labels (verbs, objects and scenes) and us-
ing corresponding feature representations for each: activity recognition with dense
trajectories [92], id164 with lsda [31], and scene classi   cation with

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

15

smt [67]
s2vt [88]
visual labels [66] someone is standing in the crowd, a little man with a little smile.
reference

someone is a man, someone is a man.
someone looks at him, someone turns to someone.

someone, back in elf guise, is trying to calm the kids.

the car is a water of the water.
smt [67]
s2vt [88]
on the door, opens the door opens.
visual labels [66] the fellowship are in the courtyard.
reference

they cross the quadrangle below and run along the cloister.

smt [67]

someone is down the door, someone is a back of the door,
and someone is a door.
someone shakes his head and looks at someone.

s2vt [88]
visual labels [66] someone takes a drink and pours it into the water.
reference

someone grabs a vodka bottle standing open on the counter
and liberally pours some on the hand.

fig. 9 qualitative results on the mpii movie description (mpii-md) dataset [67]. the    visual
labels    approach [66] which uses an intermediate layer of robust attributes, identi   es activities,
objects, and places better than related work. from [66].

places-id98 [99]. second, training each semantic group separately, which removes
noisy negatives. and third, selecting only the most reliable classi   ers. while rohr-
bach et al. use smt for sentence generation in [67], they rely on a recurrent network
(lstm) in [66].

the visual labels approach outperforms prior work [88, 67, 96] on the mpii-
md [67] and m-vad [86] dataset with respect to automatic and human evaluation.
qualitative results are shown in fig. 9. an interesting characteristic of the com-
pared methods is the size of the output vocabulary, which is 94 for [67], 86 for
[88] (which uses an end-to-end lstm approach without an intermediate semantic
representation) and 605 for [66]. although it is far lower than 6,422 for the human
reference sentences, it clearly shows a higher diversity of the output for [66].

3.4 describing novel object categories

in this section we discuss how to describe novel object categories which combines
challenges discussed for recognizing novel categories (section 2) and generating
descriptions (section 3.1). state-of-the-art deep image and video captioning ap-
proaches (e.g. [91, 50, 12, 16, 89]) are limited to describe objects which appear
in caption corpora such as ms coco [8] which consist of pairs of images and
sentences. in contrast, labeled image datasets without sentence descriptions (e.g.
id163 [10]) or text only corpora (e.g. wikipedia) cover many more object cate-
gories.

hendricks et al. [30] propose the deep compositional captioner (dcc) to ex-
ploit these vision-only and language-only unpaired data sources to describe novel
categories as visualized in fig. 10. similar to the attribute layer discussed in sec-
tion 3.1, hendricks et al. extract words as labels from the descriptions to learn a
   lexical layer   . the lexical layer is expanded by objects from id163 [10].

marcus rohrbach

16

fig. 10 describing novel ob-
ject categories which are not
contained in caption corpora
(like otter). the deep compo-
sitional captioner (dcc) [30]
uses an intermediate semantic
attribute or    lexical    layer
to connect classi   ers learned
on unpaired image datasets
(id163) with text corpora
(e.g. wikipedia). this allows
it to compose descriptions
about novel objects without
any paired image-sentences
training data. adapted from
[29].

fig. 11 qualitative results for describing novel id163 object categories. dcc [30] compared
to an ablation without transfer. x     y: known word x is transferred to novel word y. from [29].

to be able to not only recognize but also generate the description about the novel
objects, dcc transfers the word prediction model from semantically closest known
word in the lexical layer, where similarity is computed with id97 [55]. inter-
esting to note is, that image captioning approaches such as [91, 12] do use id163
data to (pre-) train the models (indicated with a dashed arrow in fig. 10), but they
do not make use of the semantic information but only the learned representation.

fig. 11 shows several categories where there exist no captions for training. with
respect to quantitative measures, compared to a baseline without transfer, dcc im-
proves meteor from 18.2% to 19.1% and f1 score, which measures the appear-

deep compositional captionerpaired image-sentence dataa bus driving down the street.unpaired text dataa otter that is sitting in the water.a dog sitting on a boat in the water.unpaired image dataexisting methods otteralpacapizzabusyummy pizza sitting on the table.[...] otters live in a variety of aquatic environments. they [...][...] pepperoni is a popular pizza topping. [...]no transfer: a close up of a person holding a cell phone.dcc: a toad is sitting on a table.no transfer: a piece of cake with a fork and a fork.dcc: a tiramisu is sitting on a plate.no transfer: a couple of cows sitting next to each other.dcc: a couple of alpaca standing next to each other in a field.no transfer: a close up of a plate of food with a bowl of fruit.dcc: a close up of a plate of food with a bowl of persimmon.no transfer: a white and black and white photo of a white and blue fire hydrant.dcc: a candelabra is sitting on a table.no transfer: a close up of a plate of food on a table.dcc: a close up of a fig.no transfer: a small bird sitting on a green plant.dcc: a dragonfly with a green plant on a green plant.no transfer: a brown and white cow standing in a field.dcc: a impala is standing in the dirt.bird     toadchocolate     tiramisusheep    alpacafruit    persimmonvase    candelabratree    figbird    dragonflygiraffe    impalabird    cockatoono transfer: a white bird standing on a white surface..dcc: a white cockatoo sitting on a grass covered field.bear    coyoteno transfer: a couple of giraffe standing next to each other.dcc: a coyote is standing in the middle of a forest.attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

17

(a) without bounding box annotations at train-
ing or test time grounder [65] learns to ground
free-form natural language phrases in images.

(b) grounder [65] reconstructs
phrases by learning to attend to
the right box at training time.

(c) grounder [65] local-
izes boxes test time.

fig. 12 unsupervised grounding by learning to associate visual and textual semantic units. from
[65].

ance of the novel object, from 0 to 34.3%. hendricks et al. also show similar results
for video description.

4 grounding text in images

in this section we discuss the problem of grounding natural language in images.
grounding in this case means that given an image and a natural language sentence
or phrase, we aim to localize the subset of the image which corresponds to the input
phrase. for example, for the sentence    a little brown and white dog emerges from
a yellow collapsable toy tunnel onto the lawn.    and the corresponding image in
fig. 12(a), we want to segment the sentence into phrases and locate the correspond-
ing bounding boxes (or segments) in the image. while grounding has been addressed
e.g. in [40, 34, 5, 81], it is restricted to few categories. an exception are karpathy
et al. [36, 37] who aim to discover a latent alignment between phrases in text and
bounding box proposals in the image. karpathy et al. [37] ground dependency-tree
relations to image regions using multiple instance learning (mil) and a ranking
objective. karpathy and fei-fei [36] simplify the mil objective to just the maxi-
mal scoring box and replace the dependency tree with a learned recurrent network.
these approaches have unfortunately not been evaluated with respect to the ground-
ing performance due to a lack of annotated datasets. only recently two datasets were

- a little brown and white dog- a yellow collapsable toy tunnel- the lawn- a little brown and white dog- a yellow collapsable toy tunnel- the lawninput: phrases + images (no bounding box annotation at training or test time)output: grounded phrases- a man- a small boy- their small, white dog- a toygrounder- a man- a small boy- their small, white dog [failure]- a toy [failure]attenda mana manlstmgroundingreconstructioninputlstmattenda manlstm18

marcus rohrbach

a man walking by a sitting man
on the street.

a white dog is following a black
dog along the beach.

three people on a walk down
a cement path beside a    eld of
wild   owers with skyscrapers in
the background.

fig. 13 qualitative results for grounder unsupervised [65] on flickr 30k entities [60]. compact
textual semantic units (phrases, e.g.    a sitting man   ) are associated with visual semantic units
(bounding boxes). best viewed in color.

released: flickr30k entities [60] augments flickr30k [97] with bounding boxes for
all noun phrases present in textual descriptions and referitgame [38] has localized
referential expressions in images. even more recent, at the time of writing, efforts
are being made to also collect grounded referential expressions for the ms coco
[47] dataset, namely the authors of referitgame are in progress of extending their
annotations as well as longer referential expressions have been collected by mao
et al. [51]. similar efforts are also made in the visual genome project [41] which
provides densely annotated images with phrases.

in the following we focus on how to approach this problem and the    rst ques-
tion is, where is the best point of interaction between linguistic elements and visual
elements? following the approaches in [36, 37, 60] a good way to this is to decom-
pose both, sentence and image into concise semantic units or attributes which we
can match to each other. for the data as shown in figures 12(a) and 13, sentences
can be split into phrases of typically a few words and images are composed into a
larger number of bounding box proposals [87]. an alternative is to integrate phrase
grounding in a fully-convolutional network, for bounding box prediction [35] or
segmentation prediction [33]. in the following, we discuss approaches which focus
on how to    nd the association between visual and linguistic components, rather than
the actual segmentation into components. we    rst look at an unsupervised setting
with respect to the grounding task, i.e. we assume that no bounding box annota-
tions are available for training (section 4.1), and then we show how to integrate
supervision (section 4.2). section 4.3 discusses the results.

4.1 unsupervised grounding

although many data sources contain images which are described with sentences or
phrases, they typically do not provide the spatial localization of the phrases. this

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

19

scrc [32]

grounder semi-supervised [65]

with 3.12% annot.

grounder supervised [65]

anywhere but the people        rst person in line     group people center     very top left of whole image

the street     tree to the far left     top middle sky     white car far right bottom corner

fig. 14 qualitative grounding results on referitgame dataset [38]. different colors show different
referential expressions for the same image. best viewed in color.

is true for both curated datasets such as mscoco [47] or large user generated
content as e.g. in the yfcc 100m dataset [84]. consequently, being able to learn
from this data without grounding supervision would allow large amount and variety
of training data. this setting is visualized in fig. 12(a).

for this setting rohrbach et al. [65] propose the approach grounder, which is
able to learn the grounding by aiming to reconstruct a given phrase using an atten-
tion mechanism as shown in fig. 12(b). in more detail, given images paired with
natural language phrases (or sentence descriptions), but without any bounding box
information, we want to localize these phrases with a bounding box in the image
(fig. 12c). to do this, grounder learns to attend to a bounding box proposal and,
based on the selected bounding box, reconstructs the phrase (fig. 12b). attention
means that the model predicts a weighting over the bounding boxes and then takes
the weighted average of the features from all boxes. a softmax over the weights en-
courages that only one or a few boxes have high weights. as the second part of the
model (fig. 12b, bottom) is able to predict the correct phrase only if the    rst part of
the model attended correctly (fig. 12b, top), this can be learned without additional
bounding box supervision. at test time we evaluate the grounding performance, i.e.
whether the model assigned the highest weight to / attended to the correct bounding
box. the model is able to learn these associations as the parameters of the model
are learned across all phrases and images. thus, for a proper reconstruction, the vi-
sual semantic units and linguistic phrases have to match, i.e. the models learns what
certain visual phrases mean in the image.

20

marcus rohrbach

approach
unsupervised training
grounder (vgg-cls) [65]
grounder (vgg-det) [65]
semi-supervised training
grounder (vgg-cls) [65]

3.12% annotation
6.25% annotation
12.5% annotation
supervised training
cca embedding [60]
scrc (vgg+spat) [32]
grounder (vgg-cls) [65]
grounder (vgg-det) [65]

accuracy

24.66
32.42

33.02
37.10
38.67

25.30
27.80
41.56
47.70

approach
unsupervised training
lrcn [12] (reported in [32])
caffe-7k [27] (reported in [32])
grounder (vgg+spat) [65]
semi-supervised training
grounder (vgg+spat) [65]

3.12% annotation
6.25% annotation
12.5% annotation
supervised training
scrc (vgg+spat) [32]
grounder (vgg+spat) [65]

accuracy

8.59
10.38
10.44

15.03
19.53
21.65

17.93
26.93

(a) flickr 30k entities dataset [60]

(b) referitgame dataset [38]

table 4 phrase grounding, accuracy in %. vgg-cls: pre-training the vgg network [79] for the
visual representation on id163 classi   cation data only. vgg-det: vgg further    ne-tuned
for the id164 task on the pascal dataset [15] using fast r-id98 [25]. vgg+spat:
vgg-cls + spatial bounding box features (box location and size).

4.2 semi-supervised and fully supervised grounding

if grounding supervision (phrase bounding box associations) is available, grounder
[65] can integrate it by adding a loss over the attention mechanism (fig. 12b,    at-
tend   ). interestingly, this allows to provide supervision only for a subset of the
phrases (semi-supervised) or all phrases (fully supervised).

for supervised grounding, plummer et al. [60] proposed to learn a cca em-
bedding [26] between phrases and the visual representation. the spatial context
recurrent convnet (scrc) [32] and the approach of mao et al. [51] use a caption
generation framework to score phrases on a set of bounding box proposals. this al-
lows to rank bounding box proposals for a given phrase or referential expression. hu
et al. [32] show the bene   t of transferring models trained on full-image description
datasets as well as spatial (bounding box location and size) and full-image context
features. mao et al. [51] show how to discriminatively train the id134
framework to better distinguish different referential expression.

4.3 grounding results

in the following we discuss results on the flickr 30k entities dataset [60] and the
referitgame dataset [38], which both provide ground truth alignment between noun
phrases (within sentences) and bounding boxes. for the unsupervised models, the
grounding annotations are only used at test time for evaluation, not for training. all

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

21

fig. 15 to approach visual id53, andreas et al. [2] propose to dynamically create
a deep network which is composed of different    modules    (colored boxes). these    modules    rep-
resent semantic units, i.e. attributes, which link linguistic units in the question with computational
units to do the corresponding visual recognition. adapted from [1].

approaches use the activations of the second last layer of the vgg network [79] to
encode the image inside the bounding boxes.

table 4(a) compares the approaches quantitatively. the unsupervised variant of
grounder reaches nearly the supervised performance of cca [60] or scrc[32]
on flickr 30k entities, successful examples are shown in fig. 13. for the referen-
tial expressions of the referitgame dataset the unsupervised variant of grounder
reaches performance on par with prior work (table 4b) and quickly gains perfor-
mance when adding few labeled training annotation (semi-supervised training). in
the fully supervised setting grounder improves signi   cantly over state-of-the-art
on both datasets, which is also re   ected in the qualitative results shown in fig. 14.

5 visual id53

visual id53 is the problem of answering natural language questions
about images, e.g. for the question    where is the amber cat?    about the image
shown in fig. 15 we want to predict the corresponding answer on the    oor, or just
   oor. this is a very interesting problem with respect to several aspects. on the one
hand it has many applications, such visual search, id176, and as-
sisting blind people. on the other hand, it is also an interesting research direction
as it requires to relate textual and visual semantics. more speci   cally it requires to
ground the question in the image, e.g. by localizing the relevant part in the image
(amber cat in fig. 15), and then recognizing and predicting an answer based on
the question and the image content. consequently, this problem requires more com-
plex semantic interaction between language and visual recognition than in previous
sections, speci   cally, the problem requires ideas from grounding (section 4) and
recognition (section 2) or description (section 3).

wherecountcolor...ambersitting...lstmfloorcatid98where is the amber cat?layoutparseranddog22

marcus rohrbach

test-dev

test
y/n num other all all
lstm
78.7 36.6 28.1 49.8
   
att+lstm
   
80.6 36.4 42.0 57.2
nmn
   
70.7 36.8 39.2 54.8
nmn+lstm
   
81.2 35.2 43.3 58.0
nmn+lstm+ft 81.2 38.0 44.0 58.6 58.7
lstm: a question-only baseline
att: single find+describe for all questions
nmn+lstm: full model shown in fig. 15
+ft: image features    ne-tuned on captions [12]
nmn: ablation w/o lstm
(a) results from evaluation server of [4] in %.

how many different
lights in various
different shapes and
sizes?
four (four)

what color is the
vase?

is the bus full of
passengers?

green (green)

no (no)

(b) answers from [1] (ground truth answers in parentheses).

fig. 16 results on the vqa dataset [4]. adapted from [1].

most recent approaches to visual id53 learn a joint hidden embed-
ding of the question and the image to predict the answer [49, 63, 24, 4] where all
computation is shared and identical for all questions. an exception to this is pro-
posed by wu et al. [95], who learn an intermediate attribute representation from
the image descriptions, similar to the work discussed in sections 3.3 and 3.4. in-
terestingly, this intermediate layer of attributes allows to query an external knowl-
edge base to provide additional (textual) information not visible in the image. the
embedded textual knowledge base information is combined with the attribute rep-
resentation and the hidden representation of a caption-generation recurrent network
(lstm) and forms the input to an lstm-based question-answer encoder-decoder
[49].

andreas et al. [2] go one step further with respect to compositionality and
propose to predict a compositional neural network structure from the questions.
as visualized in fig. 15 the question    where is the amber cat?    is decomposed
into network    modules    amber, cat, and, and where. these modules are seman-
tic units, i.e. attributes, which connect most relevant semantic components of the
questions (i.e. word or short phrases) with corresponding computation to recog-
nize it in the image. these neural module networks (nmn) have different types
of modules for different types of attributes. different types have different col-
ors in fig. 15. the find[cat] and find[amber] (green) modules take in id98
activations (vgg [79], last convolutional layer) and produce a spatial attention
heatmap, while combine[and] (orange) combines two heatmaps to a single one,
and describe[where] (blue) takes in a heatmap and id98 features to predict an an-
swer. note that the distinction between different types, e.g. find versus describe,
which have different kind of computation and different instances, e.g. find[cat]
versus find[amber], which learn different parameters. all parameters are initial-
ized randomly and only trained from question answer pairs. interestingly, in this
work attributes are not only distinguished with respect of their type, but also are
composed with other attributes in a deep network, whose parameters    are learned

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

23

end-to-end from examples, here question-answer pairs. in a follow up work, an-
dreas et al. [3] learn not only the modules, but also what the best network structure
is from a set of parser proposals, using id23.

in addition to nmn, andreas et al. [2, 3] also incorporate a recurrent net-
work (lstm) to model common sense knowledge and dataset bias which has been
shown to be important for visual id53 [49]. quantitative results in
table 16(a) indicate that nmns are indeed a powerful tool to id53, a
few qualitative results can be seen fig. 16(b).

6 conclusions

in this chapter we presented several tasks and approaches where attributes enable
a connection of visual recognition with natural language on a semantic level. for
recognizing novel object categories or activities, attribute can build an intermedi-
ate representation which allows incorporating knowledge mined from language re-
sources or script data (section 2). for this scenario we saw that semantic attribute
classi   ers additionally build a good metric distance space useful for constructing
instance graphs and learning composite activity recognition models. in section 3
we explained how an intermediate level of attributes can be used to describe videos
with multiple sentences and at a variable level and allow describing novel object
categories. in section 4 we presented approaches for unsupervised and supervised
grounding of phrases in images. different phrases are semantically overlapping and
the examined approaches try to relate these semantic units by jointly learning repre-
sentations for the visual and language modalities. section 5 discusses an approach
to visual id53 which composes the most important attributes of a
question in a compositional computation graph, whose parameters are learned end-
to-end only by back-propagating from the answers.

while the discussed approaches take a step towards the challenges discussed in
section 1.1, there are many future steps ahead. while the approaches in section 2
use many advanced semantic relatedness measures minded from diverse language
resources they are not jointly trained on textual and visual modalities. regneri et al.
[62] and silberer et al. [78] take a step in this direction by looking at joint semantic
representation from the textual and visual modalities. section 3 presents composi-
tional models for describing videos, but it is only a    rst step towards automatically
describing a movie to a blind person as humans can do it [67], which will require
an even higher degree of semantic understanding, and transfer within and between
modalities. section 4 describes interesting ideas to grounding in images and it will
be interesting to see how this scales to the size of the internet. visual question an-
swering (section 5) is an interesting emerging direction with many challenges as it
requires to solve all of the above, at least to some extend.

acknowledgements i would like to thank all my co-authors, especially those whose publications
are presented in this chapter. namely, sikandar amin, jacob andreas, mykhaylo andriluka, trevor

24

marcus rohrbach

darrell, sandra ebert, jiashi feng, annemarie friedrich, iryna gurevych, lisa anne hendricks,
ronghang hu, dan klein, raymond mooney, manfred pinkal, wei qiu, michaela regneri, anna
rohrbach, kate saenko, michael stark, bernt schiele, gy  orgy szarvas, stefan thater, ivan titov,
subhashini venugopalan, and huazhe xu.

marcus rohrbach was supported by a fellowship within the fitweltweit-program of the ger-

man academic exchange service (daad).

references

[1] j. andreas, m. rohrbach, t. darrell, and d. klein. deep composi-
arxiv preprint

tional id53 with neural module networks.
arxiv:1511.02799, 2015.

[2] j. andreas, m. rohrbach, t. darrell, and d. klein. neural module networks.
in conference on id161 and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2016.
[3] j. andreas, m. rohrbach, t. darrell, and d. klein. learning to compose neu-
ral networks for id53. in proceedings of the conference of the
north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics
(naacl), 2016.

[4] s. antol, a. agrawal, j. lu, m. mitchell, d. batra, c. l. zitnick, and
in international conference

d. parikh. vqa: visual id53.
on id161 (iccv), 2015.

[5] k. barnard, p. duygulu, d. forsyth, n. de freitas, d. m. blei, and m. i.
jordan. matching words and pictures. journal of machine learning research
(jmlr), 3:1107   1135, 2003.

[6] e. bart and s. ullman. single-example learning of novel classes using rep-
resentation by similarity. in proceedings of the british machine vision con-
ference (bmvc), 2005.

[7] h.-h. chen, m.-s. lin, and y.-c. wei. novel association measures using
web search with double checking. in proceedings of the annual meeting of
the association for computational linguistics (acl), 2006.

[8] x. chen, h. fang, t.-y. lin, r. vedantam, s. gupta, p. dollar, and c. l.
zitnick. microsoft coco captions: data collection and evaluation server.
arxiv preprint arxiv:1504.00325, 2015.

[9] j. deng, w. dong, r. socher, l.-j. li, k. li, and l. fei-fei. id163: a
large-scale hierarchical image database. in conference on id161
and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2009.

[10] j. deng, a. berg, k. li, and l. fei-fei. what does classifying more than
10,000 image categories tell us? in european conference on id161
(eccv), 2010.

[11] l. r. dice. measures of the amount of ecologic association between species.

ecology, 26(3):297   302, 1945.

[12] j. donahue, l. a. hendricks, s. guadarrama, m. rohrbach, s. venugopalan,
k. saenko, and t. darrell. long-term recurrent convolutional networks for

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

25

visual recognition and description. in conference on id161 and
pattern recognition (cvpr), 2015.

[13] k. duan, d. parikh, d. crandall, and k. grauman. discovering localized
attributes for fine-grained recognition. in conference on id161
and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2012.

[14] s. ebert, d. larlus, and b. schiele. extracting structures in image collec-
tions for object recognition. in european conference on id161
(eccv), 2010.

[15] m. everingham, l. van gool, c. k. williams, j. winn, and a. zisserman.
international journal of

the pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge.
id161 (ijcv), 88(2):303   338, 2010.

[16] h. fang, s. gupta, f. n. iandola, r. srivastava, l. deng, p. doll  ar, j. gao,
x. he, m. mitchell, j. c. platt, c. l. zitnick, and g. zweig. from captions
to visual concepts and back. in conference on id161 and pattern
recognition (cvpr), 2015.

[17] a. farhadi, i. endres, d. hoiem, and d. forsyth. describing objects by
their attributes. in conference on id161 and pattern recognition
(cvpr), 2009.

[18] a. farhadi, i. endres, and d. hoiem. attribute-centric recognition for cross-
in conference on id161 and pattern

category generalization.
recognition (cvpr), 2010.

[19] r. farrell, o. oza, v. morariu, t. darrell, and l. davis. birdlets: subordinate
categorization using volumetric primitives and pose-normalized appearance.
in international conference on id161 (iccv), 2011.

[20] c. fellbaum. id138: an electronical lexical database. the mit press,

1998.

[21] a. frome, g. corrado, j. shlens, s. bengio, j. dean, m. ranzato, and
in con-

t. mikolov. devise: a deep visual-semantic embedding model.
ference on neural information processing systems (nips), 2013.

[22] y. fu, t. m. hospedales, t. xiang, and s. gong. learning multimodal latent
attributes. ieee transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
(pami), 36(2):303   316, 2014.

[23] e. gabrilovich and s. markovitch. computing semantic relatedness using
wikipedia-based explicit semantic analysis. in proceedings of the interna-
tional joint conference on arti   cial intelligence (ijcai), 2007.

[24] h. gao, j. mao, j. zhou, z. huang, l. wang, and w. xu. are you talking to
a machine? dataset and methods for multilingual image id53.
in conference on neural information processing systems (nips), 2015.

[25] r. girshick. fast r-id98. in international conference on id161

(iccv), 2015.

[26] y. gong, l. wang, m. hodosh, j. hockenmaier, and s. lazebnik. improving
image-sentence embeddings using large weakly annotated photo collections.
in european conference on id161 (eccv), 2014.

26

marcus rohrbach

[27] s. guadarrama, e. rodner, k. saenko, n. zhang, r. farrell, j. donahue,
and t. darrell. open-vocabulary object retrieval. in robotics: science and
systems, 2014.

[28] k. he, x. zhang, s. ren, and j. sun. delving deep into recti   ers: surpassing
human-level performance on id163 classi   cation. in international con-
ference on id161 (iccv), 2015.

[29] l. a. hendricks, s. venugopalan, m. rohrbach, r. mooney, k. saenko, and
t. darrell. deep compositional captioning: describing novel object cat-
egories without paired training data. arxiv preprint arxiv:1511.05284v1,
2015.

[30] l. a. hendricks, s. venugopalan, m. rohrbach, r. mooney, k. saenko, and
t. darrell. deep compositional captioning: describing novel object cate-
gories without paired training data. in conference on id161 and
pattern recognition (cvpr), 2016.

[31] j. hoffman, s. guadarrama, e. tzeng, j. donahue, r. girshick, t. darrell,
and k. saenko. lsda: large scale detection through adaptation. in confer-
ence on neural information processing systems (nips), 2014.

[32] r. hu, h. xu, m. rohrbach, j. feng, k. saenko, and t. darrell. natural
in conference on id161 and pattern

language object retrieval.
recognition (cvpr), 2015.

[33] r. hu, m. rohrbach, and t. darrell. segmentation from natural language

expressions. arxiv preprint arxiv:1603.06180, 2016.

[34] j. johnson, r. krishna, m. stark, l.-j. li, d. shamma, m. bernstein, and
l. fei-fei. id162 using scene graphs. in conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2015.

[35] j. johnson, a. karpathy, and l. fei-fei. densecap: fully convolutional lo-
calization networks for dense captioning. in conference on id161
and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2016.

[36] a. karpathy and l. fei-fei. deep visual-semantic alignments for generating
image descriptions. in conference on id161 and pattern recogni-
tion (cvpr), 2015.

[37] a. karpathy, a. joulin, and l. fei-fei. deep fragment embeddings for bidi-
in conference on neural information

rectional image sentence mapping.
processing systems (nips), 2014.

[38] s. kazemzadeh, v. ordonez, m. matten, and t. l. berg. referitgame: refer-
ring to objects in photographs of natural scenes. in proceedings of the con-
ference on empirical methods in natural language processing (emnlp),
2014.

[39] p. koehn. id151. cambridge university press,

2010.

[40] c. kong, d. lin, m. bansal, r. urtasun, and s. fidler. what are you talking
in conference on id161 and

about? text-to-image coreference.
pattern recognition (cvpr), 2014.

[41] r. krishna, y. zhu, o. groth, j. johnson, k. hata, j. kravitz, s. chen,
y. kalanditis, l.-j. li, d. a. shamma, m. bernstein, and l. fei-fei. visual

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

27

genome: connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image
annotations. arxiv preprint arxiv:1602.07332, 2016.

[42] a. krizhevsky, i. sutskever, and g. e. hinton. id163 classi   cation with
deep convolutional neural networks. in conference on neural information
processing systems (nips), 2012.

[43] c. lampert, h. nickisch, and s. harmeling. learning to detect unseen ob-
ject classes by between-class attribute transfer. in conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2009.

[44] c. h. lampert, h. nickisch, and s. harmeling. attribute-based classi   ca-
tion for zero-shot visual object categorization. ieee transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence (pami), 36(3):453   465, 2014.

[45] c. liang, c. xu, j. cheng, w. min, and h. lu. script-to-movie: a computa-
tional framework for story movie composition. multimedia, ieee transac-
tions on, 15(2):401   414, 2013.

[46] d. lin. an information-theoretic de   nition of similarity.

in international

conference on machine learning (icml), 1998.

[47] t.-y. lin, m. maire, s. belongie, j. hays, p. perona, d. ramanan, p. doll  ar,
and c. l. zitnick. microsoft coco: common objects in context. in european
conference on id161 (eccv), 2014.

[48] m. malinowski and m. fritz. a multi-world approach to id53
about real-world scenes based on uncertain input. in conference on neural
information processing systems (nips), 2014.

[49] m. malinowski, m. rohrbach, and m. fritz. ask your neurons: a neural-
based approach to answering questions about images. in international con-
ference on id161 (iccv), 2015.

[50] j. mao, w. xu, y. yang, j. wang, z. huang, and a. yuille. deep captioning
with multimodal recurrent neural networks (m-id56). in international confer-
ence on learning representations (iclr), 2015.

[51] j. mao, j. huang, a. toshev, o. camburu, a. yuille, and k. murphy. gener-
ation and comprehension of unambiguous object descriptions. in conference
on id161 and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2016.

[52] o. maron and t. lozano-p  erez. a framework for multiple-instance learning.

conference on neural information processing systems (nips), 1998.

[53] t. mensink, j. verbeek, f. perronnin, and g. csurka. metric learning for
large scale image classi   cation: generalizing to new classes at near-zero
cost. in european conference on id161 (eccv), 2012.

[54] r. mihalcea and d. i. moldovan. a method for id51
of unrestricted text. in proceedings of the annual meeting of the association
for computational linguistics (acl), 1999.

[55] t. mikolov, i. sutskever, k. chen, g. s. corrado, and j. dean. distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. in confer-
ence on neural information processing systems (nips), 2013.

[56] y. moses, s. ullman, and s. edelman. generalization to novel images in

upright and inverted faces. perception, 25:443   461, 1996.

28

marcus rohrbach

[57] d. mrowca, m. rohrbach, j. hoffman, r. hu, k. saenko, and t. darrell. spa-
tial semantic regularisation for large scale id164. in international
conference on id161 (iccv), 2015.

[58] m. palatucci, d. pomerleau, g. hinton, and t. mitchell. zero-shot learning
with semantic output codes. in conference on neural information processing
systems (nips), 2009.

[59] d. parikh and k. grauman. relative attributes. in international conference

on id161 (iccv), 2011.

[60] b. plummer, l. wang, c. cervantes, j. caicedo, j. hockenmaier, and
s. lazebnik. flickr30k entities: collecting region-to-phrase correspondences
for richer image-to-sentence models. in international conference on com-
puter vision (iccv), 2015.

[61] r. raina, a. battle, h. lee, b. packer, and a. ng. self-taught learning:
id21 from unlabeled data. in international conference on ma-
chine learning (icml), 2007.

[62] m. regneri, m. rohrbach, d. wetzel, s. thater, b. schiele, and m. pinkal.
grounding action descriptions in videos. transactions of the association
for computational linguistics (tacl), 2013.

[63] m. ren, r. kiros, and r. zemel. image id53: a visual seman-
tic embedding model and a new dataset. in conference on neural information
processing systems (nips), 2015.

[64] a. rohrbach, m. rohrbach, w. qiu, a. friedrich, m. pinkal, and b. schiele.
coherent multi-sentence video description with variable level of detail. in
proceedings of the german confeence on pattern recognition (gcpr),
2014.

[65] a. rohrbach, m. rohrbach, r. hu, t. darrell, and b. schiele. ground-
arxiv preprint

ing of textual phrases in images by reconstruction.
arxiv:1511.03745, 2015.

[66] a. rohrbach, m. rohrbach, and b. schiele. the long-short story of movie
description. proceedings of the german confeence on pattern recognition
(gcpr), 2015.

[67] a. rohrbach, m. rohrbach, n. tandon, and b. schiele. a dataset for movie
in conference on id161 and pattern recognition

description.
(cvpr), 2015.

[68] m. rohrbach. combining visual recognition and computational linguistics:
linguistic knowledge for visual recognition and natural language descrip-
tions of visual content. phd thesis, saarland university, 2014.

[69] m. rohrbach, m. stark, g. szarvas, i. gurevych, and b. schiele. what helps
where - and why? semantic relatedness for knowledge transfer. in con-
ference on id161 and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2010.

[70] m. rohrbach, m. stark, and b. schiele. evaluating knowledge transfer and
in conference on computer

zero-shot learning in a large-scale setting.
vision and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2011.

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

29

[71] m. rohrbach, s. amin, m. andriluka, and b. schiele. a database for    ne
grained activity detection of cooking activities. in conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2012.

[72] m. rohrbach, m. regneri, m. andriluka, s. amin, m. pinkal, and b. schiele.
script data for attribute-based recognition of composite activities. in euro-
pean conference on id161 (eccv), 2012.

[73] m. rohrbach, m. stark, g. szarvas, and b. schiele. combining language
sources and robust semantic relatedness for attribute-based knowledge trans-
fer. in proceedings of the european conference on id161 work-
shops (eccv workshops), volume 6553 of lncs, 2012.

[74] m. rohrbach, s. ebert, and b. schiele. id21 in a transductive
setting. in conference on neural information processing systems (nips),
2013.

[75] m. rohrbach, w. qiu, i. titov, s. thater, m. pinkal, and b. schiele. trans-
lating video content to natural language descriptions. in international con-
ference on id161 (iccv), 2013.

[76] m. rohrbach, a. rohrbach, m. regneri, s. amin, m. andriluka, m. pinkal,
and b. schiele. recognizing    ne-grained and composite activities using
hand-centric features and script data. international journal of computer vi-
sion (ijcv), 2015.

[77] a. senina, m. rohrbach, w. qiu, a. friedrich, s. amin, m. andriluka,
m. pinkal, and b. schiele. coherent multi-sentence video description with
variable level of detail. arxiv preprint arxiv:1403.6173, 2014.

[78] c. silberer, v. ferrari, and m. lapata. models of semantic representation with
visual attributes. in proceedings of the annual meeting of the association for
computational linguistics (acl), 2013.

[79] k. simonyan and a. zisserman. very deep convolutional networks for large-
scale image recognition. in international conference on learning represen-
tations (iclr), 2015.

[80] j. sivic, b. c. russell, a. a. efros, a. zisserman, and w. t. freeman. dis-
covering object categories in image collections. in international confer-
ence on id161 (iccv), 2005.

[81] r. socher and l. fei-fei. connecting modalities: semi-supervised segmen-
tation and annotation of images using unaligned text corpora. in conference
on id161 and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2010.

[82] t. s  rensen. a method of establishing groups of equal amplitude in plant
sociology based on similarity of species and its application to analyses of the
vegetation on danish commons. biol. skr., 5:1   34, 1948.

[83] c. szegedy, w. liu, y. jia, p. sermanet, s. reed, d. anguelov, d. erhan,
v. vanhoucke, and a. rabinovich. going deeper with convolutions. in con-
ference on id161 and pattern recognition (cvpr), 2015.

[84] b. thomee, b. elizalde, d. a. shamma, k. ni, g. friedland, d. poland,
d. borth, and l.-j. li. yfcc100m: the new data in multimedia research.
communications of the acm, 59(2):64   73, 2016.

30

marcus rohrbach

[85] s. thrun.

is learning the n-th thing any easier than learning the    rst.

in

conference on neural information processing systems (nips), 1996.

[86] a. torabi, c. pal, h. larochelle, and a. courville. using descriptive video
services to create a large data source for video annotation research. arxiv
preprint arxiv:1503.01070v1, 2015.

[87] j. r. uijlings, k. e. van de sande, t. gevers, and a. w. smeulders. selec-
tive search for object recognition. international journal of id161
(ijcv), 104(2):154   171, 2013.

[88] s. venugopalan, m. rohrbach, j. donahue, r. mooney, t. darrell, and
arxiv preprint

sequence to sequence     video to text.

k. saenko.
arxiv:1505.00487v2, 2015.

[89] s. venugopalan, m. rohrbach, j. donahue, r. mooney, t. darrell, and
in international con-

k. saenko. sequence to sequence     video to text.
ference on id161 (iccv), 2015.

[90] s. venugopalan, h. xu, j. donahue, m. rohrbach, r. mooney, and
k. saenko. translating videos to natural language using deep recurrent neural
networks. in proceedings of the conference of the north american chapter
of the association for computational linguistics (naacl), 2015.

[91] o. vinyals, a. toshev, s. bengio, and d. erhan. show and tell: a neural
in conference on id161 and pattern

image caption generator.
recognition (cvpr), 2015.

[92] h. wang and c. schmid. action recognition with improved trajectories. in

international conference on id161 (iccv), 2013.

[93] h. wang, a. kl  aser, c. schmid, and c.-l. liu. action recognition by dense
in conference on id161 and pattern recognition

trajectories.
(cvpr), 2011.

[94] m. weber, m. welling, and p. perona. towards automatic discovery of ob-
ject categories. in conference on id161 and pattern recognition
(cvpr), 2000.

[95] q. wu, c. shen, a. v. d. hengel, p. wang, and a. dick. image captioning
and visual id53 based on attributes and their related external
knowledge. arxiv preprint arxiv:1603.02814, 2016.

[96] l. yao, a. torabi, k. cho, n. ballas, c. pal, h. larochelle, and
a. courville. describing videos by exploiting temporal structure. arxiv
preprint arxiv:1502.08029v4, 2015.

[97] p. young, a. lai, m. hodosh, and j. hockenmaier. from image descrip-
tions to visual denotations: new similarity metrics for semantic id136
over event descriptions. transactions of the association for computational
linguistics (tacl), 2:67   78, 2014.

[98] t. zesch and i. gurevych. wisdom of crowds versus wisdom of linguists -
measuring the semantic relatedness of words. natural language engineer-
ing, 16(1):25   59, 2010.

[99] b. zhou, a. lapedriza, j. xiao, a. torralba, and a. oliva. learning deep
in conference on

features for scene recognition using places database.
neural information processing systems (nips), 2014.

attributes as semantic units between natural language and visual recognition

31

[100] d. zhou, o. bousquet, t. n. lal, jason weston, and b. sch  olkopf. learning
with local and global consistency. in conference on neural information
processing systems (nips), 2004.

[101] x. zhu, z. ghahramani, and j. lafferty. semi-supervised learning using gaus-
sian    elds and id94. in international conference on machine
learning (icml), 2003.

[102] c. l. zitnick, d. parikh, and l. vanderwende. learning the visual interpre-
tation of sentences. in international conference on id161 (iccv),
2013.

