large-scale analysis of counseling conversations:

an application of natural language processing to mental health

tim althoff   , kevin clark   , jure leskovec

{althoff, kevclark, jure}@cs.stanford.edu

stanford university

6
1
0
2

 

g
u
a
4
1

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

3
v
2
6
4
4
0

.

5
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

mental illness is one of the most pressing pub-
lic health issues of our time. while counsel-
ing and psychotherapy can be effective treat-
ments, our knowledge about how to conduct
successful counseling conversations has been
limited due to lack of large-scale data with la-
beled outcomes of the conversations. in this
paper, we present a large-scale, quantitative
study on the discourse of text-message-based
counseling conversations. we develop a set of
novel computational discourse analysis meth-
ods to measure how various linguistic aspects
of conversations are correlated with conver-
sation outcomes. applying techniques such
as sequence-based conversation models, lan-
guage model comparisons, message cluster-
ing, and psycholinguistics-inspired word fre-
quency analyses, we discover actionable con-
versation strategies that are associated with
better conversation outcomes.

1

introduction

mental illness is a major global health issue. in the
u.s. alone, 43.6 million adults (18.1%) experience
mental illness in a given year (national institute of
mental health, 2015). in addition to the person di-
rectly experiencing a mental illness, family, friends,
and communities are also affected (insel, 2008).

in many cases, mental health conditions can be
treated effectively through psychotherapy and coun-
seling (who, 2015). however, it is far from ob-
vious how to best conduct counseling conversa-
tions. such conversations are free-form without
strict rules, and involve many choices that could

   both authors contributed equally to the paper.

make a difference in someone   s life. thus far, quan-
titative evidence for effective conversation strategies
has been scarce, since most studies on counseling
have been limited to very small sample sizes and
qualitative observations (e.g., labov and fanshel,
(1977); haberstroh et al., (2007)). however, recent
advances in technology-mediated counseling con-
ducted online or through texting (haberstroh et al.,
2007) have allowed counseling services to scale with
increasing demands and to collect large-scale data
on counseling conversations and their outcomes.

here we present the largest study on counseling
conversation strategies published to date. we use
data from an sms texting-based counseling service
where people in crisis (depression, self-harm, sui-
cidal thoughts, anxiety, etc.), engage in therapeutic
conversations with counselors. the data contains
millions of messages from eighty thousand counsel-
ing conversations conducted by hundreds of coun-
selors over the course of one year. we develop a set
of computational methods suited for large-scale dis-
course analysis to study how various linguistic as-
pects of conversations are correlated with conversa-
tion outcomes (collected via a follow-up survey).

we focus our analyses on counselors instead of
individual conversations because we are interested
in general conversation strategies rather than prop-
erties of speci   c issues. we    nd that there are sig-
ni   cant, quanti   able differences between more suc-
cessful and less successful counselors in how they
conduct conversations.

our    ndings suggest actionable strategies that are

associated with successful counseling:

1. adaptability (section 5): measuring the dis-

tance between vector representations of the lan-
guage used in conversations going well and go-
ing badly, we    nd that successful counselors
are more sensitive to the current trajectory of
the conversation and react accordingly.

2. dealing with ambiguity (section 6): we de-
velop a id91-based method to measure
differences in how counselors respond to very
similar ambiguous situations. we learn that
successful counselors clarify situations by writ-
ing more, re   ect back to check understanding,
and make their conversation partner feel more
comfortable through af   rmation.

3. creativity (section 6.3): we quantify the di-
versity in counselor language by measuring
cluster density in the space of counselor re-
sponses and    nd that successful counselors re-
spond in a more creative way, not copying the
person in distress exactly and not using too
generic or    templated    responses.

4. making progress (section 7): we develop a
novel sequence-based unsupervised conversa-
tion model able to discover ordered conversa-
tion stages common to all conversations. ana-
lyzing the progression of stages, we determine
that successful counselors are quicker to get to
know the core issue and faster to move on to
collaboratively solving the problem.

5. change in perspective (section 8): we de-
velop novel measures of perspective change us-
ing psycholinguistics-inspired word frequency
analysis. we    nd that people in distress are
more likely to be more positive, think about
the future, and consider others, when the coun-
selors bring up these concepts. we further
show that this perspective change is associated
with better conversation outcomes consistent
with psychological theories of depression.

further, we demonstrate that counseling success on
the level of individual conversations is predictable
using features based on our discovered conversation
strategies (section 9). such predictive tools could be
used to help counselors better progress through the
conversation and could result in better counseling
practices. the dataset used in this work has been re-
leased publicly and more information on dataset ac-
cess can be found at http://snap.stanford.

edu/counseling.

although we focus on crisis counseling in this
work, our proposed methods more generally apply
to other conversational settings and can be used to
study how language in conversations relates to con-
versation outcomes.

2 related work
our work relates to two lines of research:
therapeutic discourse analysis & psycholinguis-
tics. the    eld of conversation analysis was born in
the 1960s out of a suicide prevention center (sacks
and jefferson, 1995; van dijk, 1997). since then
conversation analysis has been applied to various
clinical settings including psychotherapy (labov
and fanshel, 1977). work in psycholinguistics has
demonstrated that the words people use can re-
veal important aspects of their social and psycho-
logical worlds (pennebaker et al., 2003). previous
work also found that there are linguistic cues as-
sociated with depression (ramirez-esparza et al.,
2008; campbell and pennebaker, 2003) as well as
with suicude (pestian et al., 2012). these    nd-
ings are consistent with beck   s cognitive model of
depression (1967; cognitive symptoms of depres-
sion precede the affective and mood symptoms) and
with pyszczynski and greenberg   s self-focus model
of depression (1987; depressed persons engage in
higher levels of self-focus than non-depressed per-
sons).

in this work, we propose an operationalized psy-
cholinguistic model of perspective change and fur-
ther provide empirical evidence for these theoretical
models of depression.
large-scale computational linguistics applied
to conversations. large-scale studies have re-
vealed subtle dynamics in conversations such as co-
ordination or style matching effects (niederhoffer
and pennebaker, 2002; danescu-niculescu-mizil,
2012) as well as expressions of social power and
status (bramsen et al., 2011; danescu-niculescu-
mizil et al., 2012). other studies have connected
writing to measures of success in the context of re-
quests (althoff et al., 2014), user retention (althoff
and leskovec, 2015), novels (ashok et al., 2013),
and scienti   c abstracts (guerini et al., 2012). prior
work has modeled dialogue acts in conversational

speech based on linguistic cues and discourse coher-
ence (stolcke et al., 2000). unsupervised machine
learning models have also been used to model con-
versations and segment them into speech acts, top-
ical clusters, or stages. most approaches employ
hidden markov model-like models (barzilay and
lee, 2004; ritter et al., 2010; paul, 2012; yang et
al., 2014) which are also used in this work to model
progression through conversation stages.

very recently,

technology-mediated counseling
has allowed the collection of large datasets on coun-
seling. howes et al. (2014)    nd that symptom sever-
ity can be predicted from transcript data with com-
parable accuracy to face-to-face data but suggest that
insights into style and dialogue structure are needed
to predict measures of patient progress. counseling
datasets have also been used to predict the conversa-
tion outcome (huang, 2015) but without modeling
the within-conversation dynamics that are studied in
this work. other work has explored how novel inter-
faces based on topic models can support counselors
during conversations (dinakar et al., 2014a; 2014b;
2015; chen, 2014).

our work joins these two lines of research by de-
veloping computational discourse analysis methods
applicable to large datasets that are grounded in ther-
apeutic discourse analysis and psycholinguistics.

3 dataset description

in this work, we study anonymized counseling con-
versations from a not-for-pro   t organization provid-
ing free crisis intervention via sms messages. text-
based counseling conversations are particularly well
suited for conversation analysis because all interac-
tions between the two dialogue partners are fully ob-
served (i.e., there are no non-textual or non-verbal
cues). moreover, the conversations are important,
constrained to dialogue between two people, and
outcomes can be clearly de   ned (i.e., we follow up
with the conversation partner as to whether they feel
better afterwards), which enables the study of how
conversation features are associated with actual out-
comes.
counseling process. any person in distress can
text the organization   s public number. incoming re-
quests are put into a queue and an available coun-
selor picks the request from the queue and engages

80,885
15,555 (19.2%)
3.2 million
663,026 (20.6%)
408
42.6
19.2

dataset statistics
conversations
conversations with survey response
messages
messages with survey response
counselors
messages per conversation*
words per message*
table 1: basic dataset statistics. rows marked with * are
computed over conversations with survey responses.
with the incoming conversation. we refer to the cri-
sis counselor as the counselor and the person in dis-
tress as the texter. after the conversation ends, the
texter receives a follow-up question (   how are you
feeling now? better, same, or worse?   ) which we
use as our conversation quality ground-truth (we use
binary labels: good versus same/worse, since we
care about improving the situation). in contrast to
previous work that has used human judges to rate
a caller   s crisis state (kalafat et al., 2007), we di-
rectly obtain this feedback from the texter. further-
more, the counselor    lls out a post-conversation re-
port (e.g., suicide risk, main issue such as depres-
sion, relationship, self-harm, suicide, etc.). all crisis
counselors receive extensive training and commit to
weekly shifts for a full year.
dataset statistics. our dataset contains 408 coun-
selors and 3.2 million messages in 80,885 conversa-
tions between november 2013 and november 2014
(see table 1). all system messages (e.g., instruc-
tions), as well as texts that contain survey responses
(revealing the ground-truth label for the conversa-
tion) were    ltered out. out of these conversations,
we use the 15,555, or 19.2%, that contain a ground-
truth label (whether the texter feels better or the
same/worse after the conversation) for the follow-
ing analyses. conversations span a variety of issues
of different dif   culties (see rows one and two of ta-
ble 2). approval to analyze the dataset was obtained
from the stanford irb.

4 de   ning counseling quality

the primary goal of this paper is to study strategies
that lead to conversations with positive outcomes.
thus, we require a ground-truth notion of conver-
sation quality. in principle, we could study individ-
ual conversations and aim to understand what fac-

na
0.556
0.200

0.203

success rate
frequency
frequency with more
successful counselors
frequency with less
successful counselors

depressed relationship self harm family suicide stress anxiety other
0.537
0.035

0.711
0.071

0.659
0.089

0.672
0.074

0.573
0.063

0.696
0.041

0.671
0.039

0.612
0.200

0.199

0.223

0.208

0.089

0.087

0.067

0.072

0.061

0.048

0.042

0.030

0.070

0.067

0.056

0.030

0.032

0.028

table 2: frequencies and success rates for the nine most common conversation issues (na: not available). on average,
more and less successful counselors face the same distribution of issues.
tors make the conversation partner (texter) feel bet-
ter. however, it is advantageous to focus on the
conversation actor (counselor) instead of individual
conversations.

there are several bene   ts of focusing analy-
ses on counselors (rather than individual conversa-
tions): first, we are interested in general conversa-
tion strategies rather than properties of main issues
(e.g., depression vs. suicide). while each conver-
sation is different and will revolve around its main
issue, we assume that counselors have a particular
style and strategy that is invariant across conversa-
tions. second, we assume that conversation qual-
ity is noisy. even a very good counselor will face
some hard conversations in which they do every-
thing right but are still unable to make their conver-
sation partner feel better. over time, however, the
   true    quality of the counselor will become appar-
ent. third, our goal is to understand successful con-
versation strategies and to make use of these insights
in counselor training. focusing on the counselor is
helpful in understanding, monitoring, and improv-
ing counselors    conversation strategies.
more vs. less successful counselors. we split
the counselors into two groups and then compare
their behavior. out of the 113 counselors with more
than 15 labeled conversations of at least 30 messages
each, we use the most successful 40 counselors as
   more successful    counselors and the bottom 40 as
   less successful    counselors. their average success
rates are 66.3-85.5% and 42.1-58.6%, respectively.
while the counselor-level analysis is of primary con-
cern, we will also differentiate between counselor
behavior in    positive    versus    negative    conversa-
tions (i.e., those that will eventually make the texter
feel better vs. not). thus, in the remainder of the
paper we differentiate between more vs.
less suc-
cessful counselors and positive vs. negative conver-
sations. studying the cross product of counselors

figure 1: differences in counselor message length (in
#tokens) over the course of the conversation are larger
between more and less successful counselors (blue cir-
cle/red square) than between positive and negative con-
versations (solid/dashed). error bars in all plots corre-
spond to bootstrapped 95% con   dence intervals using the
member id64 technique from ren et al. (2010).
and conversations allows us to gain insights on how
both groups behave in positive and negative conver-
sations. for example, figure 1 illustrates why differ-
entiating between counselors and as well as conver-
sations is necessary: differences in counselor mes-
sage length over the course of the conversation are
bigger between more and less successful counselors
than between positive and negative conversations.
initial analysis. before focusing on detailed anal-
yses of counseling strategies we address two impor-
tant questions: do counselors specialize in certain
issues? and, do successful counselors appear suc-
cessful only because they handle    easier    cases?

to gain insights into the    specialization hypoth-
esis    we make use the counselor annotation of the
main issue (depression, self-harm, etc.). we com-
pare success rates of counselors across different
issues and    nd that successful counselors have a
higher fraction of positive conversations across all
issues and that less successful counselors typically
do not excel at a particular issue. thus, we conclude
that counseling quality is a general trait or skill and

0-2020-4040-6060-8080-100portion of conversation (% of messages)12141618202224average message lengthmore successful counselors, positive conversationsmore successful counselors, negative conversationsless successful counselors, positive conversationsless successful counselors, negative conversationssupporting that the split into more and less success-
ful counselors is meaningful.

another simple explanation of the differences be-
tween more and less successful counselors could be
that successful counselors simply pick    easy    issues.
however, we    nd that this is not the case. in par-
ticular, we    nd that both counselor groups are very
similar in how they select conversations from the
queue (picking the top-most in 60.1% vs. 60.3%,
respectively), work similar shifts, and handle a sim-
ilar number of conversations simultaneously (1.98
vs. 1.83). further, we    nd that both groups face sim-
ilar distributions of issues over time (see table 2).
we attribute the largest difference,    na    (main issue
not reported), to the more successful counselors be-
ing more diligent in    lling out the post-conversation
report and having fewer conversations that end be-
fore the main issue is introduced.

5 counselor adaptability

in the remainder of the paper we focus on factors
that mediate the outcome of a conversation. first,
we examine whether successful counselors are more
aware that their current conversation is going well
or badly and study how the counselor adapts to the
situation. we investigate this question by looking
for language differences between positive and neg-
ative conversations.
in particular, we compute a
distance measure between the language counselors
use in positive conversations and the language coun-
selors use in negative conversations and observe how
this distance changes over time.

we capture the time dimension by breaking up
each conversation into    ve even chunks of messages.
then, for each set of counselors (more successful
or less successful), conversation outcome (positive
or negative), and chunk (   rst 20%, second 20%,
etc.), we build a tf-idf vector of word occurrences
to represent the language of counselors within this
subset. we use the global inverse document (i.e.,
conversation) frequencies instead of the ones from
each subset to make the vectors directly comparable
and control for different counselors having differ-
ent numbers of conversations by weighting conver-
sations so all counselors have equal contributions.
we then measure the difference between the    posi-
tive    and    negative    vector representations by taking

figure 2: more successful counselors are more varied
in their language across positive/negative conversations,
suggesting they adapt more. all differences between
more successful and less successful counselors except for
the 0-20 bucket were found to be statistically signi   cant
(p < 0.05; bootstrap resampling test).
the cosine distance in the induced vector space. we
also explored using jensen-shannon divergence be-
tween traditional probabilistic language models and
found these methods gave similar results.
results. we    nd more successful counselors are
more sensitive to whether the conversation is going
well or badly and vary their language accordingly
(figure 2). at the beginning of the conversation,
the language between positive and negative conver-
sations is quite similar, but then the distance in lan-
guage increases over time. this increase in distance
is much larger for more successful counselors than
less successful ones, suggesting they are more aware
of when conversations are going poorly and adapt
their counseling more in an attempt to remedy the
situation.

6 reacting to ambiguity

observing that successful counselors are better at
adapting to the conversation, we next examine how
counselors differ and what factors determine the dif-
ferences.
in particular, domain experts have sug-
gested that more successful counselors are better at
handling ambiguity in the conversation (levitt and
jacques, 2005). here, we use ambiguity to refer to
the uncertainty of the situation and the texter   s ac-
tual core issue resulting from insuf   ciently short or
uncertain descriptions. does initial ambiguity of the
situation negatively affect the conversation? how do
more successful counselors deal with ambiguous sit-
uations?

0-2020-4040-6060-8080-1003ortlon of conversdtlon (% of pessdges)0.0120.0130.0140.0150.0160.0170.0180.019dlstdnce between posltlve  dnd negdtlve conversdtlons0ore successful counselorsless successful counselorscal beginnings of conversations where we can di-
rectly compare how more successful and less suc-
cessful counselors react given nearly identical situa-
tions (the texter    rst sharing their reason for texting
in). we identify the situation setter within each con-
versation as the    rst long message by the texter (typ-
ically a response to a    can you tell me more about
what is going on?    question by the counselor).
results. we    nd that ambiguity plays an important
role in counseling conversations. figure 3 shows
that more ambiguous situations (shorter length of
situation setter) are less likely to result in success-
ful conversations (we obtain similar results when
measuring concreteness (brysbaert et al., 2014) di-
rectly). further, we    nd that counselors generally
react to short and ambiguous situation setters by
writing signi   cantly more than the texters (figure 4;
if counselors wrote exactly as much as the texter,
we would expect a horizontal line y = 1). how-
ever, more successful counselors react more strongly
to ambiguous situations than less successful coun-
selors.

6.2 how to respond to ambiguity
having observed that ambiguity plays an important
role in counseling conversations, we now examine
in greater detail how counselors respond to nearly
identical situations.

we match situation setters by representing them
through tf-idf vectors on bigrams and    nd similar
situation setters as nearest neighbors within a certain
cosine distance in the induced space.1 we only con-
sider situation setters that are part of a dense cluster
with at least 10 neighbors, allowing us to compare
follow-up responses by the counselors (4829/12770
situation setters were part of one of 589 such clus-
ters). we also used distributed id27s
(e.g., (mikolov et al., 2013)) instead of tf-idf vec-
tors but found the latter to produce better clusters.

based on counselor training materials we hypoth-

esize that more successful counselors

    address ambiguity by writing more themselves,
    use more check questions (statements that tell
the conversation partner that you understand

1 threshold manually set after qualitative analysis of
matches from randomly chosen clusters. results were not
overly sensitive to threshold choice, choice of representation
(e.g., word vectors), and distance measure (e.g., euclidean).

figure 3: more ambiguous situations (length of situation
setter) are less likely to result in positive conversations.

figure 4: all counselors react to short, ambiguous mes-
sages by writing more (relative to the texter message) but
more successful counselors do it more than less success-
ful counselors.
ambiguity. throughout this section we measure
ambiguity in the conversation as the shortness of the
texter   s responses in number of words. while ambi-
guity could also be measured through concreteness
ratings of the words in each message (e.g., using
concreteness ratings from brysbaert et al. (2014)),
we    nd that results are very similar and that length
and concreteness are strongly related and hard to
distinguish.

6.1

initial ambiguity and situation setter

it is challenging to measure ambiguity and reactions
to ambiguity at arbitrary points throughout the con-
versation since it strongly depends on the context of
the entire conversation (i.e., all earlier messages and
questions). however, we can study nearly identi-

[4, 9](9, 16](16, 24](24, 33](33, 632]length of situation setter (#tokens)0.40.50.60.70.8fraction of positive conv.more successfulless successful(4, 8](8, 15](15, 23](23, 32](32, 476]length of situation setter (#tokens)0.00.51.01.52.02.5|response| / |situation setter|counselor qualitymore successfulless successful% conversations successful
#messages in conversation
situation setter length (#tokens)
c response length (#tokens)
t response length (#tokens)
% cosine sim. c resp. to context
% cosine sim. t resp. to context
% c resp. w check question
% c resp. w suicide check
% c resp. w thanks
% c resp. w hedges
% c resp. w surprise

more s. less s. test
***
***
***
***
***
***
   
***
***
***
***
   

70.7
57.0
12.1
15.8
20.4
11.9
7.6
12.6
13.5
6.3
41.4
3.3

51.7
46.7
10.7
11.8
18.8
14.8
7.3
4.1
10.3
2.4
36.8
2.8

table 3: differences between more and less success-
ful counselors (c; more s. and less s.) in responses to
nearly identical situation setters (sec. 6.1) by the texter
(t). last column contains signi   cance levels of wilcoxon
signed rank tests (*** p < 0.001,     p > 0.05).

them while avoiding the introduction of any
opinion or advice (labov and fanshel, 1977);
e.g.   that sounds like...   ),

    check for suicidal thoughts early (e.g.,    want to

die   ),

    thank the texter for showing the courage to talk

to them (e.g.,    appreciate   ),

    use more hedges

(mitigating words used
to lessen the impact of an utterance; e.g.,
   maybe   ,    fairly   ),

    and that they are less likely to respond with sur-

prise (e.g.,    oh, this sounds really awful   ).

a set of id157 is used to detect each
class of responses (similar to the examples above).
results. we    nd several statistically signi   cant dif-
ferences in how counselors respond to nearly iden-
tical situation setters (see table 3). while situation
setters tend to be slightly longer for more success-
ful counselors (suggesting that conversations are not
perfectly randomly assigned), counselor responses
are signi   cantly longer and also spur longer texter
responses. further, the more successful counselors
respond in a way that is less similar to the original
situation setter (measured by cosine similarity in tf-
idf space) compared to less successful counselors
(but the texter   s response does not seem affected).
we do    nd that more successful counselors use more
check questions, check for suicide ideation more of-
ten, show the texter more appreciation, and use more
hedges, but we did not    nd a signi   cant difference
with respect to responding with surprise.

figure 5: more successful counselors use less com-
mon/templated responses (after the texter    rst explains
the situation). this suggests that they respond in a more
creative way. there is no signi   cant difference between
positive and negative conversations.
6.3 response templates and creativity
in section 6.2, we observed that more successful
counselors make use of certain templates (including
check questions, checks for suicidal thoughts, af   r-
mation, and using hedges). while this could suggest
that counselors should stick to such prede   ned tem-
plates, we    nd that, in fact, more successful coun-
selors do respond in more creative ways.

we de   ne a measure of how    templated    the
counselors responses are by counting the number of
similar responses in tf-idf space for the counselor
reaction (c.f., section 6.2; again using a manually
de   ned and validated threshold on cosine distance).
figure 5 shows that more successful counselors
use less common/templated questions. this sug-
gests that while more successful counselors ques-
tions follow certain patterns, they are more creative
in their response to each situation. this tailoring of
responses requires more effort from the counselor,
which is consistent with the results in figure 1 that
showed that more successful counselors put in more
effort in composing longer messages as well.

7 ensuring conversation progress

after demonstrating content-level differences be-
tween counselors, we now explore temporal differ-
ences in how counselors progress through conversa-
tions. using an unsupervised conversation model,
we are able to discover distinct conversation stages
and    nd differences between counselors in how they

more successfulless successfulcounselor quality81012141618202224# similar counselor reactionsconversation qualitypositivenegativemove through these stages. we further provide ev-
idence that these differences could be related to
power and authority by measuring linguistic coor-
dination between the counselor and texter.

7.1 unsupervised conversation model
counseling conversations follow a common struc-
ture due to the nature of conversation as well as
counselor training. typically, counselors    rst intro-
duce themselves, get to know the texter and their
situation, and then engage in constructive prob-
lem solving. we employ unsupervised conversation
modeling techniques to capture this stage-like struc-
ture within conversations.

our conversation model is a message-level hid-
den markov model (id48). figure 6 illustrates the
basic model where hidden states of the id48 rep-
resent conversation stages. unlike in prior work on
conversation modeling, we impose a    xed ordering
on the stages and only allow transitions from the cur-
rent stage to the next one (figure 7). this causes
it to learn a    xed dialogue structure common to all
of the counseling sessions as opposed to conversa-
tion topics. furthermore, we separately model coun-
selor and texter messages by treating their turns in
the conversation as distinct states. we train the con-
versation model with expectation maximization, us-
ing the forward-backward algorithm to produce the
distributions during each expectation step. we ini-
tialized the model with each stage producing mes-
sages according to a unigram distribution estimated
from all messages in the dataset and uniform transi-
tion probabilities. the unigram language models are
de   ned over all words occurring more than 20 times
(over 98% of words in the dataset), with other words
replaced by an unknown token.
results. we explored training the model with vari-
ous numbers of stages and found    ve stages to pro-
duce a distinct and easily interpretable representa-
tion of a conversation   s progress. table 4 shows the
words most unique to each stage. the    rst and last
stages consist of the basic introductions and wrap-
ups common to all conversations.
in stage 2, the
texter introduces the main issue, while the counselor
asks for clari   cations and expresses empathy for the
situation. in stage 3, the counselor and texter dis-
cuss the problem, particularly in relation to the other

figure 6: our conversation model generates a particular
conversation ck by    rst generating a sequence of hid-
den states s0, s1, ... according to a markov model. each
state si then generates a message as a bag of words
wi,0, wi,1, ... according a unigram language model wsi.

figure 7: allowed state transitions for the conversation
model. counselor and texter messages are produced by
distinct states and conversations must progress through
the stages in increasing order.
people involved. in stage 4, the counselor and tex-
ter discuss actionable strategies that could help the
texter. this is a well-known part of crisis counselor
training called    collaborative problem solving.   

7.2 analyzing counselor progression
do counselors differ in how much time they spend
at each stage? in order to explore how counselors
progress through the stages, we use the viterbi al-
gorithm to assign each conversation the most likely
sequence of stages according to our conversation
model. we then compute the average duration in
messages of each stage for both more and less suc-
cessful counselors. we control for the different
distributions of positive and negative conversations
among more successful and less successful coun-
selors by giving the two classes of conversations
equal weight and control for different conversation
lengths by only including conversations between 40
and 60 messages long.
results. we    nd that more successful counselors
are quicker to move past the earlier stages, partic-

			s1 ck ws0 w0,i s0 s2 w1,i w2,i ws1 ws2 																														counselor turn texter turn stage 1 c1 stage 2 stage k c2 ck t1 t2 tk stage
1
2
3
4
5

interpretation
introductions
problem introduction
problem exploration
problem solving
wrap up

top words for texter
hi, hello, name, listen, hey
dating, moved, date, liked, ended
knows, worry, burden, teacher, group
write, writing, music, reading, play
goodnight, bye, thank, thanks, appreciate

top words for counselor
hi, name, hello, hey, brings
gosh, terrible, hurtful, painful, ago
react, cares, considered, supportive, wants
hobbies, writing, activities, distract, music
goodnight, 247, anytime, luck, 24

table 4: the top 5 words for counselors and texters with greatest increase in likelihood of appearing in each stage.
the model successfully identi   es interpretable stages consistent with counseling guidelines (qualitative interpretation
based on stage assignment and model parameters; only words occurring more than    ve hundred times are shown).

counting how often speci   c markers (e.g., auxiliary
verbs) are exhibited in conversations.
if someone
tends to use a particular marker right after their con-
versation partner uses that marker, it suggests they
are coordinating to their partner.

figure 8: more successful counselors are quicker to get
to know texter and issue (stage 2) and use more of their
time in the    problem solving    phase (stage 4).
ularly stage 2, and spend more time in later stages,
particularly stage 4 (figure 8). this suggests they
are able to more quickly get to know the texter and
then spend more time in the problem solving phase
of the conversation, which could be one of the rea-
sons they are more successful.

7.3 coordination and power differences
one possible explanation for the more successful
counselors    ability to quickly move through the
early stages is that they have more    power    in the
conversation and can thus exert more control over
the progression of the conversation. we explore
this idea by analyzing linguistic coordination, which
measures how much the conversation partners adapt
to each other   s conversational styles. research has
shown that conversation participants who have a
greater position of power coordinate less (i.e., they
do not adapt their linguistic style to mimic the other
conversational participant as strongly) (danescu-
niculescu-mizil et al., 2012).

in our analysis, we use the    aggregated 2    coordi-
nation measure c(b, a) from danescu-niculescu-
mizil (2012), which measures how much group b
coordinates to group a (a higher number means
more coordination). the measure is computed by

formally, let set s be a set of exchanges, each
involving an initial utterance u1 by a     a and a
reply u2 by b     b. then the coordination of b to a
according to a linguistic marker m is:

cm(b, a) = p (e m

u2   u1|e m

u1)     p (e m

u2   u1)
where e m
u1 is the event that utterance u1 exhibits m
(i.e., contains a word from category m) and e m
u2   u1
is the event that reply u2 to u1 exhibits m. the prob-
abilities are estimated across all exchanges in s. to
aggregate across different markers, we average the
coordination values of cm(b, a) over all markers m
to get a macro-average c(b, a). the coordination
between groups b and a is then de   ned as the mean
of the coordinations of all members of group b to-
wards the group a.

we use eight markers from danescu-niculescu-
mizil (2012), which are considered to be processed
by humans in a generally non-conscious fashion: ar-
ticles, auxiliary verbs, conjunctions, high-frequency
adverbs,
inde   nite pronouns, personal pronouns,
prepositions, and quanti   ers.

results.
texters coordinate less than coun-
selors, with texters having a coordination value
of c(texter, counselor)=0.019 compared to the
counselor   s c(counselor, texter)=0.030,
suggest-
ing that
the texters hold more    power    in
the conversation.
however, more successful
counselors coordinate less than less successful
ones (c(more succ. counselors, texter)=0.029 vs.
c(less succ. counselors, texter)=0.032). all differ-
ences are statistically signi   cant (p < 0.01; mann-
whitney u test). this suggests that more successful
counselors act with more control over the conversa-

12345stage0.000.050.100.150.200.250.300.350.40stage duration(percent of conversation)more successful counselorsless successful counselorstion, which could explain why they are quicker to
make it through the initial conversation stages.

as thanking the counselor (   i really appreciate it.   )
even if the texter does not actually feel better.

8 facilitating perspective change
thus far, we have studied conversation dynamics
and their relation to conversation success from the
counselor perspective. in this section, we show that
perspective change in the texter over time is asso-
ciated with a higher likelihood of conversation suc-
cess. prior work has shown that day-to-day changes
in writing style are associated with positive health
outcomes (campbell and pennebaker, 2003), and
existing theories link depression to a negative view
of the future (pyszczynski et al., 1987) and a self-
focusing style (pyszczynski and greenberg, 1987).
here, we propose a novel measure to quantify three
orthogonal aspects of perspective change within a
single conversation: time, self, and sentiment. fur-
ther, we show that the counselor might be able to
actively induce perspective change.
time. texters start explaining their issue largely
in terms of the past and present but over time talk
more about the future (see figure 9a; each plot
shows the relative amount of words in the liwc
past, present, and future categories (tausczik and
pennebaker, 2010)). we    nd that texters writing
more about the future are more likely to feel better
after the conversation. this suggests that changing
the perspective from issues in the past towards the
future is associated with a higher likelihood of suc-
cessfully working through the crisis.
self. another important aspect of behavior change
is to what degree the texter is able to change their
perspective from talking about themselves to con-
sidering others and potentially the effect of their sit-
uation on others (pyszczynski and greenberg, 1987;
campbell and pennebaker, 2003). we measure how
much the texter is focused on themselves by the rela-
tive amount of    rst person singular pronouns (i, me,
mine) versus third person singular/plural pronouns
(she, her, him / they, their), again using liwc. fig-
ure 9b shows that a smaller amount of self-focus is
associated with more successful conversations (pro-
viding support for the self-focus model of depres-
sion (pyszczynski and greenberg, 1987)). we hy-
pothesize that the lack of difference at the end of
the conversation is due to conversation norms such

sentiment. lastly, we investigate how much a
change in sentiment of the texter throughout the con-
versation is associated with conversation success.
we measure sentiment as the relative fraction of pos-
itive words using the liwc posemo and negemo
sentiment lexicons. the results in figure 9c show
that texters always start out more negative (value be-
low 0.5), but that the sentiment becomes more posi-
tive over time for both positive and negative conver-
sations. however, we    nd that the separation be-
tween both groups grows larger over time, which
suggests that a positive perspective change through-
out the conversation is related to higher likelihood
of conversation success. we    nd that both curves
increase signi   cantly at the very end of the con-
versation. again, we attribute this to conversation
norms such as thanking the counselor for listening
even when the texter does not actually feel better.
together with the result on talking about the fu-
ture, these    ndings are consistent with the theory of
pyszczynski et al. (1987) that depression is related
to a negative view of the future.

role of a counselor. given that positive conver-
sations often exhibit perspective change, a natural
question is how counselors can encourage perspec-
tive change in the texter. we investigate this by ex-
ploring the hypothesis that the texter will tend to talk
more about something (e.g., the future), if the coun-
selor    rst talks about it. we measure this tendency
using the same coordination measures as section 7.3
except that instead of using stylistic liwc markers
(e.g., auxiliary verbs, quanti   ers), we use the liwc
markers relevant to the particular aspect of perspec-
tive change (e.g., future, heshe, posemo). in all
cases we    nd a statistically signi   cant (p < 0.01;
mann-whitney u-test) increase in the likelihood of
the texter using a liwc marker if the counselor used
it in the previous message (~4-5% change). this link
between perspective change and how the counselor
conducts the conversation suggests that the coun-
selor might be able to actively induce measurable
perspective change in the texter.

figure 9: a: throughout the conversation there is a shift from talking about the past to future, where in positive
conversations this shift is greater; b: texters that talk more about others more often feel better after the conversation;
c: more positive sentiment by the texter throughout the conversation is associated with successful conversations.
9 predicting counseling success
in this section, we combine our quantitative insights
into a prediction task. we show that the linguistic as-
pects of crisis counseling explored in previous sec-
tions have predictive power at the level of individ-
ual conversations by evaluating their effectiveness as
features in classifying the outcome of conversations.
speci   cally, we create a balanced dataset of positive
and negative conversations more than 30 messages
long and train a id28 model to predict
the outcome given the    rst x% of messages in the
conversation. there are 3619 such negative conver-
sations and and we randomly subsample the larger
set of positive conversations. we train the model
with batch id119 and use l1 regulariza-
tion when id165 features are present and l2 reg-
ularization otherwise. we evaluate our model with
10-fold cross-validation and compare models using
the area under the roc curve (auc).
features. we include three aspects of counselor
messages discussed in section 6: hedges, check
questions, and the similarity between the counselor   s
message and previous texter message. we add a
measure of how much progress the counselor has
made (section 7) by computing the viterbi path of
stages for the conversation (only for the    rst x%)
with the id48 conversation model and then adding
the duration of each stage (in #messages) as a fea-
ture. additionally, we add average message length

figure 10: prediction accuracies vs. percent of the con-
versation seen by the model (without texter features).
and average sentiment per message using vader
sentiment (hutto and gilbert, 2014). further, we
add temporal dynamics to the model by adding fea-
ture conjunctions with the stages id48 model. af-
ter running the stages model over the x% of the con-
versation available to the classi   er, we add each fea-
ture   s average value over each stage as additional
features. lastly, we explore the bene   ts of adding
surface-level text features to the model by adding
unigram and bigram features. because the focus
of this work is on counseling strategies, we primar-
ily experiment with models using only features from
counselor messages. for completeness, we also re-
port results for a model including texter features.

prediction results. the model   s accuracy increases
with x, and we show that the model is able to dis-

0-2020-4040-6060-8080-1003ortion of fonversation (% of pessages)0.060.070.080.090.100.110.120.130.140.15)uture relative frequenfy3ositive fonversations1egative fonversations0-2020-4040-6060-8080-1003ortion of conversation (% of pessages)0.120.140.160.180.200.220.240.260.280.303ast relative frequency3ositive conversations1egative conversations0-2020-4040-6060-8080-100portion of conversation (% of pessages)0.600.620.640.660.680.700.720.740.76present relative frequencypositive conversations1egative conversations0-2020-4040-6060-8080-100portion of conversation (% of pessages)0.700.750.800.856elf relative frequencypositive conversations1egative conversations0-2020-4040-6060-8080-100portion of conversation (% of pessages)0.40.50.60.70.8posepo relative frequencypositive conversations1egative conversationsa1: past	b: self	c: sentiment	a2: present	a3: future	0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0percent of conversation seen by the model0.560.580.600.620.640.660.680.700.72roc area under the curve scorefull modelid165 features onlyfeatures
counselor unigrams only
counselor unigrams and bigrams only
none
+ hedges
+ check questions
+ similarity to last message
+ duration of each stage
+ sentiment
+ message length
+ stages feature conjunction
+ counselor unigrams and bigrams
+ texter unigrams and bigrams

roc auc
0.630
0.638
0.5
0.514 (+0.014)
0.546 (+0.032)
0.553 (+0.007)
0.561 (+0.008)
0.590 (+0.029)
0.596 (+0.006)
0.606 (+0.010)
0.652 (+0.046)
0.708 (+0.056)

table 5: performance of nested models predicting con-
versation outcome given the    rst 80% of the conversa-
tion. in bold: full models with only counselor features
and with additional texter features.
tinguish positive and negative conversations after
only seeing the    rst 20% of the conversation (see
figure 10). we attribute the signi   cant increase
in performance for x = 100 (accuracy=0.687,
auc=0.716) to strong linguistic cues that appear as
a conversation wraps up (e.g.,    i   m glad you feel
better.   ). to avoid this issue, our detailed feature
analysis is performed at x = 80.
feature analysis. the model performance as fea-
tures are incrementally added to the model is shown
in table 5. all features improve model accuracy sig-
ni   cantly (p < 0.001; paired bootstrap resampling
test). adding id165 features produces the largest
boost in auc and signi   cantly improves over a
model just using id165 features (0.638 vs. 0.652
auc). note that most features in the full model are
based on word frequency counts that can be derived
from id165s which explains why a simple id165
model already performs quite well. however, our
model performs well with only a small set of lin-
guistic features, demonstrating they provide a sub-
stantial amount of the predictive power. the effec-
tiveness of these features shows that, in addition to
exhibiting group-level differences reported earlier in
this paper, they provide useful signal for predicting
the outcome of individual conversations.

10 conclusion & future work
knowledge about how to conduct a successful coun-
seling conversation has been limited by the fact that
studies have remained largely qualitative and small-
scale. in this work, we presented a large-scale quan-

titative study on the discourse of counseling con-
versations. we developed a set of novel computa-
tional discourse analysis methods suited for large-
scale datasets and used them to discover actionable
conversation strategies that are associated with bet-
ter conversation outcomes. we hope that this work
will inspire future generations of tools available to
people in crisis as well as their counselors. for ex-
ample, our insights could help improve counselor
training and give rise to real-time counseling qual-
ity monitoring and answer suggestion support tools.
acknowledgements. we thank bob filbin for fa-
cilitating the research, cristian danescu-niculescu-
mizil for many helpful discussions, and dan ju-
rafsky, chris manning, justin cheng, peter clark,
david hallac, caroline suen, yilun wang and the
anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback
on the manuscript. this research has been sup-
ported in part by nsf cns-1010921, iis-1149837,
nih bd2k, aro muri, darpa xdata, darpa
simplex, stanford data science initiative, boe-
ing, lightspeed, sap, and volkswagen.

references
tim althoff and jure leskovec. 2015. donor retention
in online crowdfunding communities: a case dtudy
of donorschoose.org. in www.

tim althoff, cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil, and dan
jurafsky. 2014. how to ask for a favor: a case study
on the success of altruistic requests. in icwsm.

vikas ganjigunte ashok, song feng, and yejin choi.
2013. success with style: using writing style to pre-
dict the success of novels. in emnlp.

regina barzilay and lillian lee. 2004. catching the
drift: probabilistic content models, with applications
to generation and summarization. in acl.

aaron t beck. 1967. depression: clinical, experimen-
tal, and theoretical aspects, volume 32. university of
pennsylvania press.

philip bramsen, martha escobar-molano, ami patel, and
rafael alonso. 2011. extracting social power rela-
tionships from natural language. in acl.

marc brysbaert, amy beth warriner, and victor kuper-
man. 2014. concreteness ratings for 40 thousand
generally known english word lemmas. behavior re-
search methods, 46(3).

r sherlock campbell and james w pennebaker. 2003.
the secret life of pronouns    exibility in writing style
and physical health. psychological science, 14(1).

ge chen. 2014. visualizations for mental health topic

models. master   s thesis, mit.

cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil, lillian lee, bo pang,
and jon kleinberg. 2012. echoes of power: language
effects and power differences in social interaction. in
www.

cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil.

2012. a compu-
tational approach to linguistic style coordination.
ph.d. thesis, cornell university.

karthik dinakar, allison jb chaney, henry lieberman,
and david m blei. 2014a. real-time topic models for
crisis counseling. in kdd dssg workshop.

karthik dinakar, emily weinstein, henry lieberman,
and robert selman. 2014b. stacked generalization
learning to analyze teenage distress. in icwsm.

karthik dinakar, jackie chen, henry lieberman, ros-
alind picard, and robert filbin.
2015. mixed-
initiative real-time id96 & visualization for
crisis counseling. in acm iciui.

marco guerini, alberto pepe, and bruno lepri. 2012.
do linguistic style and readability of scienti   c ab-
stracts affect their virality? in icwsm.

shane haberstroh, thelma duffey, marcheta evans,
robert gee, and heather trepal. 2007. the experi-
ence of online counseling. journal of mental health
counseling, 29(3).

christine howes, matthew purver, and rose mccabe.
2014. linguistic indicators of severity and progress
in online text-based therapy for depression. clpsych
workshop at acl 2014.

rongyao huang. 2015. language use in teenage crisis
intervention and the immediate outcome: a machine
automated analysis of large scale text data. mas-
ter   s thesis, columbia university.

cj hutto and eric gilbert. 2014. vader: a parsimonious
rule-based model for id31 of social me-
dia text. in icwsm.

thomas r insel. 2008. assessing the economic costs
of serious mental illness. the american journal of
psychiatry, 165(6).

john kalafat, madelyn s gould, jimmie lou harris mun-
fakh, and marjorie kleinman. 2007. an evaluation
of crisis hotline outcomes part 1: nonsuicidal crisis
callers. suicide and life-threatening behavior, 37(3).
william labov and david fanshel. 1977. therapeutic

discourse: psychotherapy as conversation.

dana heller levitt and jodi d jacques. 2005. promot-
ing tolerance for ambiguity in counselor training pro-
grams. the journal of humanistic counseling, edu-
cation and development, 44(1).

tomas mikolov, ilya sutskever, kai chen, greg cor-
rado, and jeff dean. 2013. distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositionality.
in nips.

illness

national institute of mental health.

2015.
mental
(ami) among adults.
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/
statistics/prevalence/any-mental-
illness-ami-among-adults.shtml.
trieved october 23, 2015.

any
(n.d.).

re-

kate g niederhoffer and james w pennebaker. 2002.
linguistic style matching in social interaction. jour-
nal of language and social psychology, 21(4).

michael j paul.

2012. mixed membership markov
in

models for unsupervised conversation modeling.
emnlp-conll.

james w pennebaker, matthias r mehl, and kate g
niederhoffer. 2003. psychological aspects of natural
language use: our words, our selves. annual review
of psychology, 54(1).

john p pestian, pawel matykiewicz, michelle linn-gust,
brett south, ozlem uzuner, jan wiebe, kevin b co-
hen, john hurdle, and christopher brew. 2012. senti-
ment analysis of suicide notes: a shared task. biomed-
ical informatics insights, 5(suppl. 1).
tom pyszczynski and jeff greenberg.

self-
regulatory perseveration and the depressive self-
focusing style: a self-awareness theory of reactive de-
pression. psychological bulletin, 102(1).

1987.

tom pyszczynski, kathleen holt, and jeff greenberg.
1987. depression, self-focused attention, and ex-
pectancies for positive and negative future life events
for self and others. journal of personality and social
psychology, 52(5).

nairan ramirez-esparza, cindy k chung, ewa
kacewicz, and james w pennebaker.
2008. the
psychology of word use in depression forums in
english and in spanish: texting two text analytic
approaches. in icwsm.

shiquan ren, hong lai, wenjing tong, mostafa amin-
zadeh, xuezhang hou, and shenghan lai. 2010. non-
parametric id64 for hierarchical data. jour-
nal of applied statistics, 37(9).

alan ritter, colin cherry, and bill dolan. 2010. un-
in

supervised modeling of twitter conversations.
naacl hlt.

harvey sacks and gail jefferson. 1995. lectures on con-

versation. wiley-blackwell.

andreas stolcke, klaus ries, noah coccaro, eliza-
beth shriberg, rebecca bates, daniel jurafsky, paul
taylor, rachel martin, carol van ess-dykema, and
marie meteer.
2000. dialogue act modeling for
automatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. computational linguistics, 26(3).

yla r tausczik and james w pennebaker. 2010. the
psychological meaning of words: liwc and comput-
erized text analysis methods. journal of language and
social psychology, 29(1).

teun van dijk. 1997. discourse studies: a multidisci-

plinary approach. sage.

2015.

sheet no
who.
369.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/fs369/en/. retrieved november

depression:

fact

2, 2015.

j. yang, j. j. mcauley, j. leskovec, p. lependu, and
n. shah. 2014. finding progression stages in time-
evolving event sequences. in www.

