6
1
0
2

 

y
a
m
9

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
4
2
0

.

5
0
6
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

the controlled natural language of
randall munroe   s thing explainer

tobias kuhn

department of computer science, vu university amsterdam, netherlands

kuhntobias@gmail.com

abstract. it is rare that texts or entire books written in a controlled
natural language (cnl) become very popular, but exactly this has hap-
pened with a book that has been published last year. randall munroe   s
thing explainer uses only the 1   000 most often used words of the english
language together with drawn pictures to explain complicated things
such as nuclear reactors, jet engines, the solar system, and dishwashers.
this restricted language is a very interesting new case for the cnl com-
munity. i describe here its place in the context of existing approaches
on controlled natural languages, and i provide a    rst analysis from a
scienti   c perspective, covering the word production rules and word dis-
tributions.

1

introduction

the recent book thing explainer: complicated stu    in simple words [12] by
randall munroe (who is most well-known for his xkcd webcomics) is a very in-
teresting case for the research    eld of controlled natural languages (cnl) [11].
it is    a book of pictures and simple words [...] using only the ten hundred words
in our language that people use the most    [12] and it is both, fun and totally
serious. the quote is from the introduction of the book, and therefore it is itself
written in this language of only the 1   000 most commonly used english words
(and so is, of course, the title of the book). the following paragraph is another
example from the section about nuclear power plants, explaining radioactivity:

the special heat is made when tiny pieces of the metal break down. this
lets out a lot of heat, far more than any normal    re could. but for many
kinds of metal, it happens very slowly. a piece of metal as old as the
earth might be only half broken down by now. [12]

the book has attracted substantial popular interest and press coverage, proba-
bly more so than any other book written in a controlled natural language in
the recent past, or possibly ever. it has received very positive reviews from pres-
tigious sources such as the new york times [3], the guardian [1] (   at some
points, this produces passages of such startling clarity that one forgets there was
ever anything di   cult to understand about these phenomena.   ), and bill gates
[8] (   a brilliant concept   ), in addition to an interview in new scientist [10]. but

arguably the most    attering review is the one that appeared in the hu   ngton
post [9], because the journalist himself used the book   s controlled language to
write the entire review in it! (   so i thought i   d try to tell you a little about this
new book the same way, using just those few words.   ) the    rst edition consisted
of 300   000 printed copies [3], 34   000 of which were sold in the    rst week alone,1
and at the time of writing the book is in the top 20 of best selling books at
amazon in the category science & math.2 this popularity alone makes it an
interesting and important cnl to have a closer look at.

the language of thing explainer is also interesting because of its intriguingly
simple restriction applied on top of the english language, namely to use only the
top 1   000 most often used words. this kind of simplicity is only rivaled among
existing cnls by the language e-prime [5], whose only restriction is that the
verb to be is forbidden to use. the fact that the language   s restricted vocabulary
is not quite as simple as it looks at    rst, as we will discover below, does not
make the concept less intriguing. most reviewers and readers seem to agree that
randall munroe succeeds in proving that virtually everything can be explained
in an understandable fashion with this so heavily restricted vocabulary.

2 language analysis

even though the book and its language have become very popular, not much
has been written about the details of the language, the connection to other
similar languages, and the precise rules that underlie it. randall munroe himself
introduced the language in the book with only a few sentences. it is therefore
worth taking a closer look here.

2.1 similar languages

the new language of thing explainer is similar to some of the earliest english-
based cnls. basic english [13] was arguably the    rst such language, presented in
1930. it restricts the allowed words to just 850 root words, but many variations of
the language exist. the chosen words and the rules for their application are much
more structured than the thing explainer language, however, allowing for only
18 verbs and imposing substantial restrictions on the grammatical structures
within which these words can be used. in this sense, special english [14]    
arguably the second oldest english-based cnl     is more similar. it de   nes no
grammatical restrictions and does not restrict the number of verbs so drastically.
it is based on a list of 1   500 words, and has been used since 1959 by the voice of
america, the o   cial external broadcast institution of the united states. in both
cases, the words on the list are carefully selected and not just chosen by their

1 http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/bookselling/ar

ticle/68882-the-weekly-scorecard-tracking-unit-print-sales-for-week-e
nding-november-29-2015.html, retrieved on 9 april 2016

2 http://www.amazon.com/best-sellers-books-science-math/zgbs/books/75/, re-

trieved on 7 april 2016

frequency in english texts, unlike the thing explainer language. as another
di   erence, basic english and special english de   ne the category for the words
on the list, such as noun and verb, and allow the words only to be used in the
given category. other similar languages have a more technical background, such
as asd simpli   ed technical english (asd-ste) [4], which also restricts the
allowed words and grammatical structures for the aerospace domain, and there
are many other similar languages [11].

2.2 language properties

according to the pens classi   cation scheme, which i proposed in my survey
on the topic [11], the language of thing explainer has the same type as special
english, which is p1e5n5s1. this is also the type of full unrestricted english,
meaning that the restrictions of the thing explainer language do not make it
considerably di   erent according to the dimensions of the pens scheme: pre-
cision, expressiveness, naturalness, and simplicity. it is not considerably more
precise than full english, because no semantic restrictions come with the re-
stricted vocabulary and the grammar is not restricted at all, and therefore the
vagueness and ambiguity of natural language is not signi   cantly mitigated. in
terms of expressiveness and naturalness, on the other hand, the power of full
english is retained: randall munroe comes at least close to proving that basi-
cally everything that can be expressed in full english can be expressed in the
restricted language as well, in a way that is maybe sometimes funny but always
fully natural. with respect to the last dimension, the thing explainer language
is simple when full english can be taken for granted, but it is not signi   cantly
simpler than the full language when it has to be described from scratch. apart
from special english, other cnls in the same pens class are e-prime, plain
language, and ibm   s easyenglish [11].

2.3 word list

the list of 1   000 words was assembled by manually merging the word frequency
lists from several corpora. randall munroe reports it like this:

i spent several months going back over a bunch of di   erent lists and
generating some of my own based on the google books corpus and even
my own email inbox. then i combined the lists and where they disagreed
i just let my sense of consistency be the tie-breaker. [10]

conjugated forms of verbs and plural forms of nouns are not listed separately but
merged with the plain word form, as randall munroe explains:    i count di   erent
word forms   like    talk,       talking,    and    talked      as one word.    this does not
apply though to comparative and superlative forms of adjectives (good, better,
and best are all separate entries), adverb forms of adjectives (easy and easily
count as two words), or pronouns (i, me, my, and mine are separate entries
too). this results in a list of 998 words, which is part of the book, where the

missing two words are explained by the fact that    there   s a pair of four-letter
words that are very common, but which i left o    this page since some people
don   t like to see them.   

2.4 word production rules

now that we know how the words ended up on the list, let us have a look at
how they are supposed to be used from there to write texts such as the book we
discuss here. as there are no grammar restrictions, this boils down to selecting
word forms from the list and applying word production rules to arrive at related
word forms. randall munroe   s own description of these production rules is very
short and not very precise (the    rst sentence has been quoted above already):

in this set, i count di   erent word forms   like    talk,       talking,    and
   talked      as one word. i also allowed most    thing    forms of    doing   
words, like    talker      especially if, like    goer,    it wasn   t a real word but
it sounded funny.

as this description leaves a lot of room for interpretation, we can use the corpus
of word forms observed in thing explainer to reverse engineer the speci   c rules
at work. doing so, we arrive at no less than 13 rules, listed here roughly in
decreasing order of how naturally they follow from the above description:

1. the word forms on the list of the 1   000 most often used words.
2. all conjugation forms of verbs on the list. this includes third singular present

(-s), past (-ed ), and in   nitive from (-ing), including irregular forms.
3. noun forms built from verbs on the list by -er, for example carrier.
4. the plural forms of nouns on the list (-s), for example things, including
irregular forms like teeth. this rule can also be applied to the word other to
produce others, even though it is not a noun.

5. comparative (-er ) and superlative forms (-est) built from adjectives on the
list, for example smaller or fastest, and including irregular forms like worse.
6. adjective forms built from nouns on the list by -y or -ful, for example pointy
or colorful. (the word colorful is in fact the only one in thing explainer
derived from this -ful production rule.)

7. adverb forms built from adjectives on the list by -ly, for example normally.
8. noun forms built from adjectives on the list by -ness, for example thickness.
9. di   erent case and possessive forms of pronouns on the list: they for them,

us/ours from we/our, and his from he.

10. verb forms of nouns on the list and noun forms of verbs on the list when
the two forms are similar but not equal, such as thought from think, and live
from life, including deduced forms like thoughts and living. (these two cases
are in fact the only ones observed for this rule in thing explainer.)

11. more basic word forms for words on the list, such as nouns from which
adjectives on the list were built (person from personal ) and verbs from which
nouns on the list were built (build from building). (again, these two cases
are the only two observed instances of this rule.)

361

260

780

168
167

119
114

84

68

listed form (rule 1)
* + s (rules 2/4)
noun-verb + s (rules 2/4)
* + er (rules 3/5)
verb + ing (rule 2)
verb + er (rule 3)
verb + ed (rule 2)
irr. verb form (rule 2)
noun + s (rule 4)
verb + s (rule 2)
adj. + er (rule 5)
adj. + est (rule 5)
verb-adj. + er (rules 3/5)
noun + y (rule 6)
extra word
basic form (rule 11)
pronoun form (rule 9)
adj. + -ly (rule 7)
noun to verb (rule 10)
adj. + ness (rule 8)
irr. noun form (rule 4)
adj. to verb (rule 12)
verb to noun (rule 10)
other + s (rule 4)
adj. + ful (rule 6)
acronym (rule 13)

32
28
21
21

7
6
6
4
4
3
3
3
2
1
1
1
1

0

100

200

300
500
number of word forms

400

600

700

800

fig. 1. the origin of the word forms found in thing explainer with respect to the
di   erent production rules. the total number of such word forms is 1736.

12. verb forms built from adjectives on the list, such as lower from low, including
conjugated forms like lowering and lowered. (this example is again the only
observed instance of the rule.)

13. common acronyms for words on the list, such as tv for television. (this

example is also the only instance.)

it is not completely clear though, whether some of these later rules point to
mistakes rather than features. the confusion of tv and television, for example,
might just be a mistake and not a feature of the language.

even with these rules, six words remain that are used in thing explainer
but are not allowed according to these rules: some, mad, hat, apart, rid, and
worth. it seems that the    rst one, some, should be on the top 1   000 list, but was
accidentally omitted. the omission of they from the list seems to be a similar
mistake. it can be generated by rule 9 from them, but it seems unlikely that they
would not by itself appear in the top 1   000. the other    ve extra words might
be explained by the fact that randall munroe used a kind of spell-checker while
writing to help him use only listed words (   as i wrote, i had tools that would
warn me if i used a word that was not on the list, like a spell-checker.    [10]).
this spell-checker seems to have over-generated the said words, perhaps because
some of them are morphologically close to allowed words: mad to made; hat to

40   494

listed form (rule 1)
* + s (rules 2/4)
noun-verb + s (rules 2/4)
irr. verb form (rule 2)
verb + ing (rule 2)
* + er (rules 3/5)
noun + s (rule 4)
verb + er (rule 3)
verb + ed (rule 2)
pronoun form (rule 9)
verb + s (rule 2)
adj. + er (rule 5)
extra word
verb-adj. + er (rules 3/5)
basic form (rule 11)
adj. + est (rule 5)
noun to verb (rule 10)
noun + y (rule 6)
irr. noun form (rule 4)
adj. + -ly (rule 7)
other + s (rule 4)
adj. + ness (rule 8)
adj. + ful (rule 6)
verb to noun (rule 10)
adj. to verb (rule 12)
acronym (rule 13)

4   688

3   232

1   795
1   274
1   140
1   050
790
628
529
398
225
205
125
99
77
68
36
31
10
8
3
3
2
2
2

0k

10k

20k

30k

40k

number of word occurrences

fig. 2. the origin of the word occurrences in thing explainer with respect to the
di   erent production rules. the total number of word tokens is 51   086.

hate; and rid to ride. at other points, randall munroe stretches the rules to
the extreme. for example, the page about the us constitution is entitled    the
us   s laws of the land   , even though us is not on the list, but the pronoun us
can be inferred from we via rule 9.

figures 1 and 2 show the distribution of the word forms and word occur-
rences, respectively, with respect to the production rules. only about 45% of
the observed word forms are identical to one on the list (i.e. rule 1). if individ-
ual word occurrences are considered, about 79% of the 51   086 word tokens in
thing explainer are directly found on the list. this di   erence is not surprising,
considering that the most common words mostly have just one word form (the
top 10 most common words in the book are the, to, of, a, it, and, in, that, this,
and you). without parsing the grammatical structure of the sentences, it is not
always possible to decide which rule was applied, such as in the case of third
singular verb forms being indistinguishable from the plural noun forms for words
that could be nouns or verbs. speci   cally, 260 word forms ending in -s have a
root word that could be a noun or a verb (e.g. names), and 21 word forms ending
in -er have a root word that could be a verb or an adjective (e.g. cooler ). apart
from the listed word forms (rule 1), rules 2 to 4 are most frequently used.

fig. 3. the frequency distributions of word forms as they are found in thing explainer
(left), and the distribution of    lemmatized    terms when mapped to the list of 1   000
words (right).

as a further note, arabic numerals were not considered for this analysis. it
is not clear whether randall munroe wanted them to be part of the language or
not. he used them only to refer to page numbers, except for two occurrences of
300 in the phrase    300 years ago   , which he could have written out as    three
hundred,    as he did in many other places.

2.5 word distribution

finally, we can have a look at the word frequency distribution of word forms
as they are observed in the book and    lemmatized    words as they appear on
the list. we can check whether they follow a power law distribution (zipf   s law)
as closely as other types of texts [6]. there is no obvious reason a priori why a
text in a cnl has to follow the same distribution as an unrestricted one, but it
would not be surprising either.

the left part of figure 3 shows that the distribution of word occurrences
follows indeed quite closely a distribution of the kind of a power law, which can
be seen by the nearly straight line on the log-log plot. still the line is curved
more than other such word distributions [6], and therefore tends a bit towards a
   normal    exponential distribution and away from a pure power law. this e   ect
is even more pronounced in the lemmatized case, as shown on the right hand
side part of figure 3. for texts in unrestricted language, it has been shown
that the lemmatized distribution is normally very similar to the one of plain
word forms [7]. still, both distributions are signi   cantly better explained by
a power law distribution than an exponential one (with p-values of 0.022 and
0.017, respectively). we can hypothesize that such kinds of cnl texts in general

llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll1510505001550500frequency distribution of non   lemmatized termsrankcountllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll1510505001550500frequency distribution of lemmatized termsrankcountmitigate the power law e   ect as compared to texts in full language, but we
cannot make any conclusive statement here.

3 methods

for the analyses presented above, the text is extracted from an electronic version
of the book (excluding introduction pages and word list). the book also contains
hand written parts, which are not covered. then all characters except letters,
hyphens, and apostrophes are dropped; letters are transformed to lower case;
some text extraction errors in the form of missing and extra blank spaces are
   xed; words are de-hyphenated; contracted words like don   t are expanded; an is
normalized to a; saxon genitive markers    s are dropped; the text is tokenized at
white spaces; and compound words are split (if the compounds are recognized
words). the resulting list of tokens then serves as the input for the analyses.
furthermore, id138 is used to detect the categories of words and to lemmatize
irregular forms. for the power law analysis, the python package powerlaw [2] is
used.

4 discussion

while the topics covered by thing explainer are entirely serious and the book
attempts and (i think) succeeds in seriously conveying complex topics in a highly
understandable fashion, the book is also fun and the result of a challenge of the
sort how far can we go. randall munroe admits in the book that    in some places,
i didn   t use words even when they were allowed. i could have said    ship,    but
i stuck to    boat    because    space boat    makes me laugh.    at another place, he
writes    light drink that wakes you up    and    dark drink that wakes you up,   
even though both, tea and co   ee, are on the list. on the other hand, there are a
number of simple and important words that are not on the list. randall munroe
reports:    i could have made it easier for myself. there are a few words i was
disappointed didn   t make the cut. the biggest omission was a synonym for    rope   
or    string   . [...] the only word i had was    line   . this    ts in some contexts, but has
so many other meanings that it was hard to work with.    [10] other examples
where the omission of a word rather leads to confusion than simpli   cation include
   the one after eight    for nine,    white stu   , like what we put on food to make
it better    for salt, and    dirt branch    for root, apart from the omission of proper
names to refer to things like countries or planets. this seems to point to a
general problem of such languages with a heavily restricted vocabulary: writers
are forced to circumscribe existing concepts instead of naming them or to involve
rough analogies, which can lead to a language that even less precise than full
natural language.

these de   ciencies could be accounted for to make the language even more
useful     at the expense of some of the funniness     by increasing the number of
words from 1   000 to, perhaps, 1   500 (like special english) or even 2   000 or 3   000,
or by selecting the words manually (again like special english) instead of being

mainly led by their frequency. there is also a slight inconsistency with respect
to how the list of 1   000 words is generated and how it is used. comparative and
superlative forms of adjectives count as separate words when the list is de   ned,
but then these forms can be used in the text even if only the plain form appears
on the list. the same applies to adverb forms of adjectives built by -ly and
pronouns. normalizing them as well when the list is generated would free some
slots for additional words within the limit of 1   000 words.

in general, however, thing explainer and its language seem to be a huge
success, and this success might yield momentum to the general concept of con-
trolled natural language and existing approaches in this    eld.

references

1. n. alderman.

thing explainer: complicated stu    in simple words by
http:

randall munroe     funny, precise and beautifully designed.
//www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/17/thing-explainer-complicated
-stuff-simple-words-randall-munroe, 17 december 2015.

2. j. alstott, e. bullmore, and d. plenz. powerlaw: a python package for analysis of

heavy-tailed distributions. plos one, 9(1):e85777, 2014.

3. a. alter. randall munroe explains it all for us. http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/

24/books/randall-munroe-explains-it-all-for-us.html, 23 november 2015.

4. asd (aerospace and defence industries association of europe). simpli   ed tech-

nical english, 2013. speci   cation asd-ste100, issue 6.

5. d. d. bourland. a linguistic note: writing in e-prime. general semantics bulletin,

32(33):111   114, 1965.

6. a. clauset, c. r. shalizi, and m. e. newman. power-law distributions in empirical

data. siam review, 51(4):661   703, 2009.

7. a. corral, g. boleda, and r. ferrer-i cancho. zipfs law for word frequencies: word

forms versus lemmas in long texts. plos one, 10(7):e0129031, jul 2015.

8. b. gates. a basic guide for curious minds. https://www.gatesnotes.com/books/t

hing-explainer, 10 november 2015.

9. p. h. gleick.

   thing explainer        a review of randall munroes new book (using
the ten hundred most common words). http://www.huffingtonpost.com/peter-h
-gleick/thing-explainer---a-revie b 8650772.html, 25 november 2015.

10. d. heaven. it   s not a rocket it   s an up goer. new scientist, 228(3049):32   33, 2015.
11. t. kuhn. a survey and classi   cation of controlled natural languages. computa-

tional linguistics, 40(1):121   170, march 2014.

12. r. munroe. thing explainer     complicated stu    in simple words. houghton

mi   in harcourt, 2015.

13. c. k. ogden. basic english: a general introduction with rules and grammar. paul

treber & co., london, 1930.

14. voice of america. voa special english word book: a list of words used in special

english programs on radio, television, and the internet, 2009.

