9
0
0
2

 
c
e
d
9
2

 

 
 
]
e
m

.
t
a
t
s
[
 
 

1
v
0
1
4
5

.

2
1
9
0
:
v
i
x
r
a

a survey of statistical network models

anna goldenberg

alice x. zheng

university of toronto

microsoft research

stephen e. fienberg

carnegie mellon university

edoardo m. airoldi
harvard university

december 2009

2

contents

preface

1 introduction

1.1 overview of modeling approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 what this survey does not cover
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

3
4
7

2 motivation and dataset examples

9
2.1 motivations for network analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 sample datasets
10
2.2.1
sampson   s    monastery    study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2 the enron email corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3 the protein interaction network in budding yeast
. . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.4 the add health adolescent relationship and hiv transmission study 14
16
2.2.5 the framingham    obesity    study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.6 the nips paper co-authorship dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17

3 static network models

p2 models for social networks and their bayesian relatives

3.1 basic notation and terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert random graph model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 the exchangeable graph model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 the p1 model for social networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5
. . . . . . . . .
3.6 exponential random graph models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.7 random graph models with fixed degree distribution . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.8 blockmodels, stochastic blockmodels and community discovery . . . . . . .
3.9 latent space models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.9.1 comparison with stochastic blockmodels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 dynamic models for longitudinal data

. . . . . . . . . . .
4.1 random graphs and the preferential attachment model
4.2 small-world models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 duplication-attachment models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 continuous time markov chain models

21
21
22
23
27
29
30
32
33
36
38

41
41
44
46
47

i

4.5 discrete time markov models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5.1 discrete markov ergm model
4.5.2 dynamic latent space model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5.3 dynamic contextual friendship model (dcfm) . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 issues in network modeling

6 summary

bibliography

50
51
52
53

57

61

65

ii

preface

networks are ubiquitous in science and have become a focal point for discussion in everyday
life. formal statistical models for the analysis of network data have emerged as a major
topic of interest in diverse areas of study, and most of these involve a form of graphical rep-
resentation. id203 models on graphs date back to 1959. along with empirical studies
in social psychology and sociology from the 1960s, these early works generated an active
   network community    and a substantial literature in the 1970s. this e   ort moved into the
statistical literature in the late 1970s and 1980s, and the past decade has seen a burgeoning
network literature in statistical physics and computer science. the growth of the world
wide web and the emergence of online    networking communities    such as facebook, mys-
pace, and linkedin, and a host of more specialized professional network communities has
intensi   ed interest in the study of networks and network data.

our goal in this review is to provide the reader with an entry point to this burgeoning
literature. we begin with an overview of the historical development of statistical network
modeling and then we introduce a number of examples that have been studied in the network
literature. our subsequent discussion focuses on a number of prominent static and dynamic
network models and their interconnections. we emphasize formal model descriptions, and
pay special attention to the interpretation of parameters and their estimation. we end with
a description of some open problems and challenges for machine learning and statistics.

1

2

chapter 1

introduction

many scienti   c    elds involve the study of networks in some form. networks have been
used to analyze interpersonal social relationships, communication networks, academic paper
coauthorships and citations, protein interaction patterns, and much more. popular books
on networks and their analysis began to appear a decade ago, [see, e.g., 24; 50; 318; 319; 68]
and online    networking communities    such as facebook, myspace, and linkedin are an even
more recent phenomenon.

in this work, we survey selective aspects of the literature on statistical modeling and
analysis of networks in social sciences, computer science, physics, and biology. given the
volume of books, papers, and conference proceedings published on the subject in these
di   erent    elds, a single comprehensive survey would be impossible. our goal is far more
modest. we attempt to chart the progress of statistical modeling of network data over the
past seventy years and to outline succinctly the major schools of thought and approaches
to network modeling and to describe some of their interconnections. we also attempt to
identify major statistical gaps in these modeling e   orts. from this overview one might
then synthesize and deduce promising future research directions. kolaczyk [177] provides a
complementary statistical overview.

the existing set of statistical network models may be organized along several major
axes. for this article, we choose the axis of static vs. dynamic models. static network
models concentrate on explaining the observed set of links based on a single snapshot of the
network, whereas dynamic network models are often concerned with the mechanisms that
govern changes in the network over time. most early examples of networks were single static
snapshots. hence static network models have been the main focus of research for many
years. however, with the emergence of online networks, more data is available for dynamic
analysis, and in recent years there has been growing interest in dynamic modeling.

in the remainder of this chapter we provide a brief historical overview of network modeling
in subsequent chapters we introduce some examples studied in the network
approaches.
literature and give a more detailed comparative description of select modeling approaches.

3

1.1 overview of modeling approaches

almost all of the    statistically    oriented literature on the analysis of networks derives from
a handful of seminal papers. in social psychology and sociology there is the early work of
simmel and wol    [268] at the turn of the last century and moreno [221] in the 1930s as well as
the empirical studies of stanley milgram [215; 298] in the 1960s; in mathematics/id203
there is the erd  os-r  enyi paper on random graph models [94]. there are other papers that
dealt with these topics contemporaneously or even earlier. but these are the ones that appear
to have had lasting impact.

moreno [221] invented the sociogram     a diagram of points and lines used to represent
relations among persons, a precursor to the graph representation for networks. luce and
others developed a mathematical structure to go with moreno   s sociograms using incidence
matrices and graphs (see, e.g., [202; 200; 201; 203; 244; 282; 11]), but the structure they
explored was essentially deterministic. milgram gave the name to what is now referred to as
the    small world    phenomenon     short paths of connections linking most people in social
spheres     and his experiments had provocative results: the shortest path between any two
people for completed chains has a median length of around 6; however, the majority of chains
initiated in his experiments were never completed! (his studies provided the title for the
play and movie six degrees of separation, ignoring the compleity of his results due to the
censoring.) white [321] and fienberg and lee [100] gave a formal markov-chain like model
and analysis of the milgram experimental data, including information on the uncompleted
chains. milgram   s data were gathered in batches of transmission, and thus these models can
be thought of as representing early examples of generative descriptions of dynamic network
evolution. recently, dodds et al. [86] studied a global    replication    variation on the milgram
study in which more than 60,000 e-mail users attempted to reach one of 18 target persons
in 13 countries by forwarding messages to acquaintances. only 384 of 24,163 chains reached
their targets but they estimate the median length for completions to be 7, by assuming that
attrition occurs at random.

the social science network research community that arose in the 1970s was built upon
these earlier e   orts, in particular the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model. research on the erd  os-
r  enyi-gilbert model (along with works by katz et al. [166; 168; 167]) engendered the    eld of
random id207. in their papers, erd  os and r  enyi worked with    xed number of vertices,
n , and number of edges, e, and studied the properties of this model as e increases. gilbert
studied a related two-parameter version of the model, with n as the number of vertices
and p the    xed id203 for choosing edges. although their descriptions might at    rst
appear to be static in nature, we could think in terms of adding edges sequentially and thus
turn the model into a dynamic one. in this alternative binomial version of the erd  os-r  enyi-
gilbert model, the key to asymptotic behavior is the value    = pn . there is a    phase
change    associated with the value of    = 1, at which point we shift from seeing many small
connected components in the form of trees to the emergence of a single    giant connected
component.    probabilists such as pittel [243] imported ideas and results from stochastic
processes into the random graph literature.

holland and leinhardt [149]   s p1 model extended the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model to allow

4

for di   erential attraction (popularity) and expansiveness, as well as an additional e   ect due
to reciprocation. the p1 model was log-linear in form, which allowed for easy computation of
maximum likelihood estimates using a contingency table formulation of the model [101; 102].
it also allowed for various generalizations to multidimensional network structures [103] and
stochastic blockmodels. this approach to modeling network data quickly evolved into the
class of p    or exponential random graph models (ergm) originating in the work of frank
and strauss [110] and strauss and ikeda [287]. a trio of papers demonstrating procedures for
using ergms [316; 241; 254] led to the wide-spread use of ergms in a descriptive form for
cross sectional network structures or cumulative links for networks   what we refer to here
as static models. full maximum likelihood approaches for ergms appeared in the work of
snijders and handcock and their collaborators, some of which we describe in chapter 3.

most of the early examples of networks in the social science literature were relatively small
(in terms of the number of nodes) and involved the study of the network at a    xed point
in time or cumulatively over time. only a few studies (e.g., sampson   s 1968 data on novice
monks in the monastery [259]) collected, reported, and analyzed network data at multiple
points in time so that one could truly study the evolution of the network, i.e., network
dynamics. the focus on relatively small networks re   ected the state-of-art of computation
but it was su   cient to trigger the discussion of how one might assess the    t of a network
model. should one focus on    small sample    properties and exact distributions given some
form of minimal su   cient statistic, as one often did in other areas of statistics, or should
one look at asymptotic properties, where there is a sequence of networks of increasing size?
even if we have    repeated cross-sections    of the network, if the network is truly evolving
in continuous time we need to ask how to ensure that the continuous time parameters are
estimable. we return to many of these question in subsequent chapters.

in the late 1990s, physicists began to work on network models and study their properties
in a form similar to the macro-level descriptions of statistical physics. barab  asi, newman,
and watts, among others, produced what we can think of as variations on the erd  os-r  enyi-
gilbert model which either controlled the growth of the network or allowed for di   erential
probabilities for edge addition and/or deletion. these variations were intended to produce
phenomena such as    hubs,       local id91,    and    triadic closures.    the resulting models
gave us    xed degree distribution limits in the form of power laws     variations on preferential
attachment models (   the rich get richer   ) that date back to yule [329] and simon [269] (see
also [218])     as well as what became known as    small world    models. the small-world
phenomenon, which harks back to milgram   s 1960s studies, usually refers to two distinct
properties: (1) small average distance and (2) the    id91    e   ect, where two nodes with
a common neighbor are more likely to be adjacent. many of these authors claim that these
properties are ubiquitous in realistic networks. to model networks with the small-world
phenomenon, it is natural to utilize randomly generated graphs with a power law degree
distribution, where the fraction of nodes with degree k is proportional to k   a for some
positive exponent a. many of the most relevant papers are included in an edited collection
by newman et al. [231]. more recently this style of statistical physics models have been
used to detect community structure in networks, e.g., see girvan and newman [122] and

5

backstrom et al. [20], a phenomenon which has its counterpart description in the social
science network modeling literature.

the probabilistic literature on random graph models from the 1990s made the link with
epidemics and other evolving stochastic phenomena. picking up on this idea, watts and
strogatz [320] and others used epidemic models to capture general characteristics of the
evolution of these new variations on random networks. durrett [91] has provided us with a
book-length treatment on the topic with a number of interesting variations on the theme.
the appeal of stochastic processes as descriptions of dynamic network models comes from
being able to exploit the extensive literature already developed, including the existence and
the form of stationary distributions and other model features or properties. chung and lu
[69] provide a complementary treatment of these models and their probabilistic properties.

one of the principal problems with this diverse network literature that we see is that,
with some notable exceptions, the statistical tools for estimation and assessing the    t of
   statistical physics    or stochastic process models is lacking. consequently, no attention is
paid to the fact that real data may often be biased and noisy. what authors in the network
literature have often relied upon is the extraction of key features of the related graphical
network representation, e.g., the use of power laws to represent degree distributions or mea-
sures of centrality and id91, without any indication that they are either necessary or
su   cient as descriptors for the actual network data. moreover, these summary quantities
can often be highly misleading as the critique by stou   er et al. [285, 286] of methods used
by barab  asi [25] and v  azquez et al. [304] suggest. barab  asi claimed that the dynamics of a
number of human activities are scale-free, i.e., he speci   cally reported that the id203
distribution of time intervals between consecutive e-mails sent by a single user and time
delays for e-mail replies follow a power-law with exponent    1, and he proposed a priority-
queuing process as an explanation of the bursty nature of human activity. stou   er et al.
[286] demonstrated that the reported power-law distribution was solely an artifact of the
analysis of the empirical data and used bayes factors to show that the proposed model is
not representative of e-mail communication patterns. see a related discussion of the poor    t
of power laws in clauset et al. [74]. there are several works, however, that try to address
model    tting and model comparison. for example, the work of williams and martinez [323]
showed how a simple two-parameter model predicted    key structural properties of the most
complex and comprehensive food webs in the primary literature   . another good example is
the work of middendorf et al. [214] where the authors used network motif counts as input to
a discriminative systematic classi   cation for deciding which con   guration model the actual
observed network came from; they looked at power law, small-world, duplication-mutation
and duplication-mutation-complementation and other models (seven in total) and concluded
that the duplication-mutation-complementation model described the protein-protein inter-
action data in drosophila melanogaster species best.

machine learning approaches emerged in several forms over the past decade with the
empirical studies of faloutsos et al. [97] and kleinberg [173, 172, 174], who introduced
a model for which the underlying graph is a grid   the graphs generated do not have a
power law degree distribution, and each vertex has the same expected degree. the strict

6

requirement that the underlying graph be a cycle or grid renders the model inapplicable
to webgraphs or biological networks. durrett [91] treats variations on this model as well.
more recently, a number of authors have looked to combine the stochastic blockmodel ideas
from the 1980s with latent space models, model-based id91 [137] or mixed-membership
models [9], to provide generative models that scale in reasonable ways to substantial-sized
networks. the class of mixed membership models resembles a form of soft id91 [95]
and includes the id44 model [41] from machine learning as a special
case. this class of models o   ers much promise for the kinds of network dynamical processes
we discuss here.

1.2 what this survey does not cover

this survey focuses primarily on statistical network models and their applications. as a
consequence there are a number of topics that we touch upon only brie   y or essentially not
at all, such as

    id203 theory associated with random graph models. the probabilistic literature
on random graph models is now truly extensive and the bulk of the theorems and
proofs, while interesting in their own right, are largely unconnected with the present
exposition. for excellent introductions to this literature, see chung and lu [69] and
durrett [91]. for related results on the mathematics of id207, see bollob  as [43].
    e   cient computation on networks. there is a substantial computer science litera-
ture dealing with e   cient calculation of quantities associated with network structures,
such as shortest paths, network diameter, and other measures of connectivity, central-
ity, id91, etc. the edited volume by brandes and erlebach [48] contains good
overviews of a number of these topics as well as other computational issues associated
with the study of graphs.

    use of the network as a tool for sampling. adaptive sampling strategies modify the
sampling probabilities of selection based on observed values in a network structure.
this strategy is bene   cial when searching for rare or clustered populations. thompson
and seber [296] and thompson [293] discuss adaptive sampling in detail. there is also
related work on target sampling [294] and respondent-driven sampling [258; 305].

    neural networks. neural networks originated as simple models for connections in the
brain but have more recently been used as a computational tool for pattern recognition
(e.g., bishop [38]), machine learning (e.g., neal [228]), and models of cognition (e.g.,
rogers and mcclelland [257]).

    networks and economic theory. a relatively new area of study is the link between
network problems, economic theory, and game theory. some useful entrees to this
literature are even-dar and kearns [96], goyal [131], kearns et al. [169], and jackson

7

[160], whose book contains an excellent semi-technical introduction to network concepts
and structures.

    relational networks. this is a very popular area in machine learning. it uses proba-
bilistic id114 to represent uncertainty in the data. the types of    networks   
in this area, such as bayes nets, dependency diagrams, etc., have a di   erent meaning
than the networks we consider in this review. the main di   erence is that the net-
works in our work are considered to    be given    or arising directly from properties of
the network under study, rather than being representative of the uncertainty of the
relationships between nodes and node attributes. there is a multitude of literature
on relational networks, e.g., see friedman et al. [112], getoor et al. [117], neville and
jensen [229]; neville et al. [230], and getoor and taskar [116].

    bi-partite graphs. these are graphs that represent measurement on two populations
of objects, such as individuals and features. the graphs in this context are seldom
the best representation of the data, with exception perhaps of binary measurements
or when the true populations have comparable sizes. recent work on exchangeable
rasch matrices is related to to this topic and potentially relevant for network analysis.
lauritzen [186, 187]; bassetti et al. [29] suggest applications to bipartite graphs.

    agent-based modeling. building on older ideas such as cellular automata, agent-based
modeling attempts to simulate the simultaneous operations of multiple agents, in an
e   ort to re-create and predict the actions of complex phenomena. because the inter-
est is often on the interaction among the agents, this domain of research has been
linked with network ideas. with the recent advances in high-performance computing,
simulations of large-scale social systems have become an active area of research, e.g.,
see [46]. in particular, there is a strong interest in areas that revolve around national
security and the military, with studies on the e   ects of catastrophic events and bio-
logical warfare, as well as computational explorations of possible recovery strategies
[57; 59]. these works are the contemporary counterparts of more classical work at the
interface between arti   cial intelligence and the social sciences [54; 56; 55].

8

chapter 2

motivation and dataset examples

2.1 motivations for network analysis

why do we analyze networks? the motivation behind network analysis is as diverse as the
origin of network problems within di   ering academic    elds. before we delve into details of
the    how    of statistical network modeling, we start with some examples of the    why.    this
chapter also includes descriptions of popular datasets for interested readers who may wish
to exercise their modeling muscles.

social scientists are often interested in questions of interpretation such as the meanings of
edges in a social network [181]. do they arise out of friendliness, strategic alliance, obligation,
or something else? when the meaning of edges are known, the object is often to characterize
the structure of those relations (e.g., whether friendships or strategic alliances are hierarchical
or transitive). a large volume of statistically-oriented social science literature is dedicated to
modeling the mechanisms and relations of network properties and testing hypotheses about
network structure, see, e.g., [280].

physicists, on the other hand, tend to be interested in understanding parsimonious mech-
anisms for network formation [28; 235]. for example, a common modeling goal is to explain
how a given network comes to have its particular degree distribution or diameter at time t.
several network analysis concepts have found niches in computational biology. for ex-
ample, work on protein function classi   cation can be thought of as    nding hidden groups in
the protein-protein interaction network [7; 8] to gain better understanding of underlying bi-
ological processes. label propagation (node similarity) in networks can be harnessed to help
with functional gene annotation [226]. graph alignment can be used to locate subgraphs
that are common among species, thus advancing our understanding of evolution [105]. mo-
tif    nding, or more generally the search for subgraph patterns, also has many applications
[17]. combining networks from heterogeneous data sources helps to improve the accuracy
of predicted genetic interactions [327]. heterogeneity of network data sources in biology
introduces a lot of noise into the global network structure, especially when networks created
for di   erent purposes (such as protein co-regulation and gene co-expression) are combined.
[225] addresses network de-noising via degree-based structure priors on graphs. for a review

9

of biological applications of networks, please see [332].

the task of    nding hidden groups is also relevant in analyzing communication networks,
e.g., in detecting possible latent terrorist cells [30]. the related task of discovering the    roles   
of individual nodes is useful for identity disambiguation [36] and for business organization
analysis [207]. these applications often take the machine learning approach of graph parti-
tioning, a topic previously known in social science and statistics literature as blockmodeling
[199; 89]. a related question is functional id91, where the goal is not to statistically
cluster the network, but to discover members of dynamic communities with similar functions
based on existing network connectivity [122; 232; 234; 266].

in the machine learning community, networks are often used to predict missing informa-
tion, which can be edge related, e.g., predicting missing links in the network [238; 73; 198],
or attribute related, e.g., predicting how likely a movie is to be a box o   ce hit [229]. other
applications include locating the crucial missing link in a business or a terrorist network, or
calculating the id203 that a customer will purchase a new product, given the pattern
of purchases of his friends [142]. the latter question can more generally be stated as predict-
ing individual   s preferences given the preferences of her    friends   . this research direction
has evolved into an area of its own under the name of recommender systems, which has
recently received a lot of media attention due to the competition by the largest online movie
rental company net   ix. the company has awarded a prize of one million dollars to a team
of researchers that were able to predict customer ratings of movies with higher than 10%
accuracy than their own in-house system [290].

the concept of information propagation also    nds many applications in the network
domain, such as virus propagation in computer networks [310], hiv infection networks [222;
163; 164], viral marketing [87] and more generally gossiping [170]. here some work focuses
on    nding network con   gurations optimal for routing, while other research assumes that the
network structure is given and focus on suitable models for disease or information spread.

2.2 sample datasets

a plethora of data sets are available for network analysis, and more are emerging every year.
we provide a quick guided tour of the most popular datasets and applications in each    eld.
in his ground-breaking paper, milgram [215] experimented with the construction of in-
terpersonal social networks. his result that the median length of completed chains was
approximately 6 led to the pop-culture coining of the phrase    six degrees of separation.   
subjects of subsequent studies ranged from social interactions of monks [259], to hierar-
chies of elephants [209; 303], to sexual relationships between adults of colorado [176], to
friendships amongst elementary school students [141; 299].

while a lot of biological applications focus on the study of protein-protein interaction
networks [114; 115; 184; 248; 328], metabolic networks [158], functional and co-expression
gene similarity networks and gene regulatory networks [111; 309], computer science applica-
tions revolve around e-mail [207], the internet [97; 63; 151], the web [152; 13], academic paper
co-authorship [127] and id191 [204; 216]. id191 have a long history

10

of modeling in di   erent areas of research starting with the seminal paper of de solla price
[83] and more recently in physics [190]. with the recent rise of online networks, computer
science and social science researchers are also starting to examine blogger networks such as
livejournal, social networks found on friendster, facebook, orkut, and dating networks such
as match.com.

terrorist networks (often simulated) and telecommunication networks have come under
similar scrutiny, especially since the events of september 11, 2001 (e.g., see [182; 250; 249;
62]). there has also been work on ecological networks such as foodwebs [323; 16], neuronal
networks [188], network epidemiology [306], economic trading networks [123], transporta-
tion networks (roads, railways, airplanes; e.g., [113]), resource distribution networks, mobile
phone networks [92] and many others.

several network data repositories are available on public websites and as part of packages.
for example, ucinet1 includes a lot of well known smaller scale datasets such as the davis
southern club women dataset [80], zachary   s karate club dataset [330], and sampson   s
monk data [259] described below. pajek2 contains a larger set of small and large networks
from domains such as biology, linguistics, and food-web. additional datasets in a variety
of domains include power grid networks, us politics, cellular and protein networks and
others3. a collection of large and very large directed and undirected networks in the areas
of communication, citation, internet and others are available as part of stanford network
analysis package (snap)4.

we now introduce six examples of networks studied in the literature, describing the data
in reasonable detail and including graphs depicting the networks wherever feasible. for each
network example we articulate speci   c questions of interest.

2.2.1 sampson   s    monastery    study

a classic example of a social network is the one derived from the survey administered by
samspon and published in his doctoral dissertation [259]. figure 2.1 displays the network
derived from the    whom do you like    sociometric relations in this dataset. sampson spent
several months in a monastery in new england, where a number of novices were preparing to
join a monastic order. sampson   s original analysis was rooted in direct anthropological ob-
servations. he strongly suggested the existence of tight factions among the novices: the loyal
opposition (whose members joined the monastery    rst), the young turks (whose members
joined later on), the outcasts (who were not accepted in either of the two main factions), and
the waverers (who did not take sides). the events that took place during sampson   s stay at
the monastery supported his observations. for instance, john and gregory, two members
of the young turks, were expelled over religious di   erences, and other members resigned

1http://www.analytictech.com/ucinet/
2http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/data/
3http://www-personal.umich.edu/~mejn/netdata/

http://cdg.columbia.edu/cdg/datasets
http://www.nd.edu/~networks/resources.htm

4http://snap.stanford.edu/data/

11

figure 2.1: network derived from    whom do you like    sociometric relations collected by
sampson.

shortly after these events. about a year after leaving the monastery, sampson surveyed
all of the novices, and asked them to rank the other novices in terms of four sociometric
relations:
like/dislike, esteem, personal in   uence, and alignment with the monastic credo,
retrospectively, at four di   erent epochs spanning his stay at the monastery.

the presence of a well de   ned social structure within the monastery (the factions) that
can be inferred from responses to the survey, as well as the social dynamics of subtle ideo-
logical con   icts that led to the dissolution of the monastic order, have much intrigued both
statisticians and social scientists for the past four decades. researchers typically consider
the faction labels assigned by sampson to the novices as the anthropological ground truth
in their analysis. for example analyses, we refer to [103; 137; 81; 9].

2.2.2 the enron email corpus

the enron email corpus has been widely studied in recent machine learning network litera-
ture. enron corporation was an energy and trading company specializing in the marketing of
electricity and gas. in 2000 it was the seventh largest company in the united states with re-
ported revenues of over $100 billion. on december 2, 2001, enron    led for bankruptcy. the
sudden collapse cast suspicions over its management and prompted federal investigations.
thirty-four enron o   cials were prosecuted and top enron executives and associates were
subsequently found to be guilty of accounting fraud. during the investigation, the courts
subpoenaed extensive email logs from most of enron   s employees, and the federal energy
regulatory commission (ferc) published the database online.5 subsequently, researchers

5http://www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/wec/enron/info-release.asp

12

ambrose_9victor_8greg_2mark_7albert_16john_1basil_3elias_17armand_13simp_18bonaven_5peter_4romul_10louis_11berth_6hugh_14winf_12boni_15figure 2.2: e-mail exchange data among 151 enron executives, using a threshold of a mini-
mum of 5 messages for each link. source: [153].

in the calo (cognitive assistant that learns and organizes) project corrected integrity
problems in the dataset.6 the original ferc dataset contains 619,446 email messages (about
92% of enron   s sta    emails), and the cleaned-up calo dataset contains 200,399 messages
from 158 users. another version of the data consists of the contents of the mail folders of
the top 151 executives, containing about 225,000 messages covering a period from 1997 to
2004.7 figure 2.2 and figure 2.3 give network snapshots of the e-mail tra   c among these
151 executives with thresholds of 5 and 30 messages, respectively.

research activity on the enron dataset range from document classi   cation to social-

6http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~enron/
7http://www.isi.edu/~adibi/enron/enron.htm

figure 2.3: e-mail exchange data among 151 enron executives, using a threshold of a mini-
mum of 30 messages for each link. source: [153].

13

network analysis to visualization. a collection of papers working with the enron corpus
were gathered together in a special 2005 issue of computational & mathematical organization
theory, see [58].

2.2.3 the protein interaction network in budding yeast

the budding yeast is a unicellular organism that has become a de-facto model organism
for the study of molecular and cellular biology [47]. there are about 6,000 proteins in the
budding yeast, which interact in a number of ways [64]. for instance, proteins bind together
to form protein complexes, the physical units that carry out most functions in the cell
[184]. in recent years, a large amount of resources has been directed to collect experimental
evidence of physical proteins binding, in an e   ort to infer and catalogue protein complexes
and their multifaceted functional roles [e.g. 98; 159; 300; 114; 143]. currently, there are
four main sources of interactions between pairs of proteins that target proteins localized
in di   erent cellular compartments with variable degrees of success: (i) literature curated
interactions [248], (ii) yeast two-hybrid (y2h) interaction assays [328], (iii) protein fragment
complementation (pca) interaction assays [291], and (iv) tandem a   nity puri   cation (tap)
interaction assays [115; 184]. these collections include a total of about 12,292 protein
interactions [162], although the number of such interactions is estimated to be between
18,000 [328] and 30,000 [307]. figure 2.4 shows a popular image of the interaction network
among proteins in the budding yeast, produced as part of an analysis by barab  asi and oltvai
[27].

statistical methods have been developed for analyzing many aspects of this large protein
interaction network, including de-noising [32; 8], function prediction [227], and identi   cation
of binding motifs [23].

2.2.4 the add health adolescent relationship and hiv trans-

mission study

the national longitudinal study of adolescent health (add health) is a study of adoles-
cents in the united states drawn from a representative sample of middle, junior high, and
highschools. the study focused on patterns of friendship, sexual relationships, as well as
disease transmissions. to date, four waves of surveys have been collected over the course of
   fteen years.

wave i surveys occurred between 1994 to 1995 and included 90,118 students from 145
schools across the country. each student completed an in-school questionnaire on his or her
family background, school life and activities, friendships, and health status. administrators
from participating schools also completed questionnaires about student demography and
school curriculum and services.
in addition, 20,745 students were chosen for an in-home
interview that included more sensitive topics such as sexual behavior. for 16 selected schools
(two large and fourteen small), add health attempted to administer the in-home survey to
all enrolled students. this saturated sample distinguishes itself from the ego-centric and

14

figure 2.4: a popular image of the protein interaction network in saccharomyces cerevisiae,
also known as the budding yeast. the    gure is reproduced with permission. source: [27].

snowball samples collected from past studies; it allows for the construction of relationship
networks with more accurate global characteristics. the fully observed friendship networks
in all the schools are also a valuable resource and an important contribution of this work.

wave ii data collection occurred 18-months after wave i in 1996 and followed up on the
in-home interviews. the dataset covered 14,738 adolescents and 128 school administrators.
based on the data collected from wave i and ii, bearman et al. [31] constructed the timed
sequence of relationship networks amongst students from the two large schools with saturated
sampling. the resulting sexual relationship network bears strong resemblance to a spanning
tree as opposed to previously hypothesized core or inverse-core structures8 (see figure 2.5.)

wave iii interviews were conducted in 2001 and 2002 with topics including marriage,

8a core is a group of inter-connected individuals who sit at the center of the graph and interact with
individuals on the periphery. an inverse core is a group of central individuals who are connected to those
on the periphery but not to each other.

15

figure 2.5: the add health sexual relationships network of us highschool adolescents. this
   gure is reproduced with permission. source: bearman et al. [31]

childbearing, and sexually transmitted diseases. of the original wave i in-home respondents,
15,170 were interviewed again for wave iii. of these, 13,184 participants provided oral    uid
specimens for hiv testing. morris et al. [223] studied the prevalence of hiv infections among
young adults based on data collected in wave iii.

wave iv interviews were conducted in 2007 and 2008 with the original wave i respon-
dents, who are now dispersed across the nation in all 50 states. of the original respondents,
92.5% were located and 80.3% were interviewed. the interview included a comprehensive
survey of the social, emotional, spiritual, and physical aspects of health. physical measure-
ments, biospecimen, and geographical data were also collected.

for detailed information about the data, as well as access to the public-domain and

restricted-access datasets, see http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth.

2.2.5 the framingham    obesity    study

one of the most famous and important epidemiological studies was initiated in framingham,
massachusetts, a suburb of boston, in 1948 with an originally enrolled cohort of 5209 people.
in 1971 investigators initiated an    o   spring    cohort study which enrolled most of the chil-
dren of the original cohort and their spouses. participants completed a questionnaire and
underwent physical examinations (including measurements of height and weight) in three-

16

year periods beginning 1973, 1981, 1985, 1989, 1992, 1997, 1999. christakis and fowler [65]
derive body mass index information on a total of 12,067 individuals who appeared in any of
the framingham heart cohorts (one    close friend    for each cohort member).9 there were
38,611 observed family and social ties (edges) to the core 5,124 cohort members.

through a series of network snapshots and statistical analyses, christakis and fowler
described the evolution of the    id91    of obesity in this social network. in particular
they claim to have examined whether the data conformed to    small-world,       scale-free,   
and    hierarchical    types of of random graph network models. figure 2.6 depicts data on the
largest connected subcomponent (the so-called giant component) for the network in 2000,
which consists of 2200 individuals. other analyses in their paper explore attributions of the
individuals via longitudinal logistic-regression models with lagged e   ects. subsequently, they
have published similar papers focused on the dynamics of smoking behavior over time [66]
and on happiness [67], both using the structure of framingham    o   spring    cohort.

this work has come under criticism by others. for example cohen-cole and fletcher
note that there are plausible alternative explanations to the network structure based on con-
textual factors [77], and in a separate paper demonstrate that the same methodology detects
   implausible    social network e   ects for such medical conditions as acne and headaches as
well as for physical height [78]. the authors answer to these criticisms can be found in [108].
the question of the magnitude and signi   cance of social network e   ects is still a subject of
an ongoing debate.

2.2.6 the nips paper co-authorship dataset

the nips dataset contains information on publications that appeared in the neural in-
formation processing systems (nips) conference proceedings, volumes 1 through 12, cor-
responding to years 1987-1999   the pre-electronic submission era. the original collection
contained scanned full papers made available by yann lecunn. sam roweis subsequently
processed the data to glean information such as title, authorship information, and word
counts per document. in total, there are 2,037 authors and 1,740 papers with an average of
2.29 authors per paper and 1.96 papers per author. the nips database is available from
sam roweis    website10 in raw and matlab formats along with a detailed description and
information on its construction.

various authors have used the nips data to analyze author-to-author connectivity in
static [126] as well as dynamic settings [264]. li and mccallum [197] modeled the text of the
documents and sarkar et al. [265] analyzed the two-mode network (author-word-author) in
a dynamic context. in figure 2.7 we reproduce a graphic illustration of the inferred dynamic
evolution of the network from [263].

9a body-mass index value (weight in kg. divided by the square of the height in meters) of 30 or more

was taken to indicate obesity.

10http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~roweis/data.html

17

figure 2.6: obesity network from framingham o   spring cohort data. each node represents
one person in the dataset (a total of 2200 in this picture). circles with red borders denote
women, with blue borders     men. the size of each circle is proportional to the body-mass
index. the color inside the circle denotes obesity status - yellow is obese (body-mass index
    30, green is non-obese. the colors of ties between nodes indicate relationships - purple
denotes a friendship or marital tie and orange is a familial tie. this    gure is reproduced
with permission. source: [65].

18

figure 2.7: nips paper co-authorship data. each point represents an author. two authors
are linked by an edge if they have co-authored at least one paper at nips. left: 1991-1994.
right: 1995-1998. each graph contains all the links for the selected period. several well
known people in the machine learning    eld are highlighted. the size of the circles around
selected individuals depend on their number of collaborations. colors are meant to facilitate
visualization. this    gure is reproduced with permission. source: [263].

19

nips 1995-1998 nips 1991-1994 20

chapter 3

static network models

a number of basic network models are essentially static in nature. the statistical activities
associated with them focus on certain local and global network statistics and the extent to
which they capture the main elements of actual realized networks. in this chapter, we brie   y
summarize two lines of research. the    rst originates in the mathematics community with
the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model and led to two types of generalizations: (i) the    statistical
physics    generalizations that led to power laws for degree distributions   the so-called scale-
free graphs, and (ii) the exchangeable graph models that introduce weak dependences among
the edges in a controlled fashion, which ultimately lead to a range of more structured con-
nectivity patterns and enable model comparison strategies rooted in id205. a
second line of research originated in the statistics and social sciences communities in response
to a need for models of social networks. the p1 model of holland and leinhardt, which in
some sense generalizes the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model, and the more general descriptive fam-
ily of exponential random graph models e   ectively initiate this line of modeling. some of
these models also have a generative interpretation that allows us to think about their use in
a dynamic, evolutionary setting. we de   ne and discuss popular dynamic interpretations of
the data generating process, including the generative interpretation, in chapter 4.

3.1 basic notation and terminology

in theoretical computer science, a graph or network g is often de   ned in terms of nodes and
edges, g     g(n ,e), where n is a set of nodes and e a set of edges, and n = |n|, e = |e|.
in the statistical literature, g is often de   ned in terms of the nodes and the corresponding
measurements on pairs of nodes, g     g(n ,y). y is usually represented as a square matrix
of size n    n . for instance, y may be represented as an adjacency matrix y with binary
elements in a setting where we are only concerned with encoding presence or absence of
edges between pairs of nodes. for undirected relations the adjacency matrix is symmetric.
henceforth we will work with graphs mostly de   ned in terms of its set of n nodes and its
ij yij = e directed edges. nodes in the network may
represent individuals, organizations, or some other kind of unit of study. edges correspond

binary adjacency matrix y containing(cid:80)

21

to types of links, relationships, or interactions between the units, and they may be directed,
as in the holland-leinhardt model, or undirected, as in the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model.

a note about terminology:

in computer science, graphs contain nodes and edges; in
social sciences, the corresponding terminology is usually actors and ties. we largely follow
the computer science terminology in this review.

3.2 the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert random graph model

the mathematical biology literature of the 1950s contains a number of papers using what we
now know as the network model g(n, p), which for a network of n nodes sets the id203
of an edge between each pair of nodes equal to p, independently of the other edges, e.g., see
solomono    and rapoport [281] who discuss this model as a description of a neural network.
but the formal properties of simple random graph network models are usually traced back to
gilbert [119], who examined g(n, p), and to erd  os and r  enyi [93]. the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert
random graph model, g(n, e), describes an undirected graph involving n nodes and a    xed

number of edges, e, chosen randomly from the(cid:0)n
interpretation is that all(cid:0)(n

(cid:1) possible edges in the graph; an equivalent
(cid:1) graphs are equally likely.1 the g(n, p) model has a binomial

2

2 )
e

likelihood where the id203 of e edges is

2 )   e,
or, equivalently, in terms of the n    n binary adjacency matrix y

(cid:96)(g(n, p) has e edges | p) = pe(1     p)(n

(cid:96)(y | p) =(cid:81)

i(cid:54)=j pyij (1     p)1   yij .

model speci   es the number of edges, e, and implies the expected    marginal    id203 of

the likelihood of the g(n, e) model is a hypergeometric distribution and this induces a uni-
form distribution over the sample space of possible graphs. the g(n, p) model speci   es the

id203 of every edge, p, and controls the expected number of edges, p  (cid:0)n
(cid:1). the g(n, e)
every edge, e/(cid:0)n
(cid:1). the g(n, p) model is more commonly found in modern literature on
erd  os and r  enyi [94] went on to describe in detail the behavior of g(n, e) as p = e/(cid:0)n
(cid:1)

random id207, in part because the independence of edges simpli   es analysis [see, e.g.,
69; 91].

2

2

increases from 0 to 1. in the binomial version the key to asymptotic behavior is the value of
   = pn . one of the important erd  os-r  enyi results is that there is a phase change at    = 1,
where a giant connected component emerges while the other components remain relatively
small and mostly in the form of trees [see 69; 91]. more formally,

2

p1. if    < 1, then a graph in g(n, p) will have no connected components of size larger

than o(log n ), a.s. as n        .

p2. if    = 1, then a graph in g(n, p) will have a largest component whose size is of

o(n 2/3), a.s. as n        .

1both versions are often referred to as erd  os-r  enyi models in the current literature.

22

p3. if    tends to a constant c > 1, then a graph in g(n, p) will have a unique    giant   
component containing a positive fraction of the nodes, a.s. as n        . no other
component will contain more than o(log n ) nodes, a.s. as n        .

a summary of a proof using branching processes is given in the appendix of this chapter.
some of the proof concepts will be useful for discussion of exchangeable graph models in
section 3.3.

the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model has spawned an enormous number of mathematical pa-
pers that study and generalize it, e.g., see [43]. but few of them are especially relevant for
the actual statistical analysis of network data.
in essence, the model dictates that every
node in a graph has approximately the same number of neighbors. empirically there are
few observed networks with such simple structure, but we still need formal tools for decid-
ing on how poor a    t the model provides for a given observed network, and what kinds of
generalized network models appear to be more appropriate. this has led to two separate
literatures, one of which has focused on formal statistical properties associated with estimat-
ing parameters of network models   the p1 and exponential random graph models described
below   and a second that identi   es selected predicted features of models and empirically
checks observed networks for those features. the latter is largely associated with papers
emanating from statistical physics and computer science, several of which are described in
detail in chapter 4.

3.3 the exchangeable graph model

the exchangeable graph model provides the simplest possible extension of the original ran-
dom graph model by introducing a weak form of dependence among the id203 of sam-
pling edges (i.e., exchangeability) that is due to non-observable node attributes, in the form
of node-speci   c binary strings. this extension helps focus the analysis, whether empirical or
theoretical, on the interplay between connectivity of a graph and its node-speci   c sources of
variability [1; 5].

consider the following data generating process for an exchangeable graph model, which

generates binary observations on pairs of nodes.

1. sample node-speci   c k-bit binary strings for each node n     n

(cid:126)bn     unif (vertex set of k-hypercube),

2. sample directed edges for all node pairs n, m     n    n

ynm     bern(cid:0) q((cid:126)bn,(cid:126)bm)(cid:1),

where (cid:126)b1:n are k-bit binary strings2, and q maps pairs of binary strings into the [0, 1] interval.
this generation process induces weakly dependent edges. the edges are conditionally inde-

2note that the space of k-bit binary strings can be mapped one-to-one to the vertex set of the k-

hypercube, i.e., the unit hypercube in k dimensions.

23

pendent given the binary string representations of the incident nodes. they are exchangeable
in the sense of de finetti [82].

from a statistical perspective, the exchangeable graph model we survey here [1; 5] pro-
vides perhaps the simplest step-up in complexity from the random graph model [93; 119]. in
the data generation process, the bit strings are equally probable but the induced probabilities
of observing edges are di   erent. a class of random graphs with such a property has been
recently rediscovered and further explored in the mathematics literature, where the class of
such graphs is referred to as inhomogeneous random graphs [45]. an alternative and arguably
more interesting set of speci   cations can be obtained by imposing dependence among the
bits at each node. this can be accomplished by sampling sets of dependent probabilities
from a family of distributions on the unit hypercube, (cid:126)pn     [0, 1]k, and then sampling the
bits independently given these dependent probabilities.

1. sample node-speci   c k-bit binary strings for each node n     n

(cid:126)pn     hypercube ((cid:126)  ,   ,   ), where    > (k     1)       > 0,
bnk     bern (pnk), for k = 1, . . . , k

2. sample directed edges for all node pairs n, m     n    n

ynm     bern(cid:0) q((cid:126)bn,(cid:126)bm)(cid:1),

in the hypercube distribution3, (cid:126)  ,   ,    control the frequency, variability and correlation of
the bits within a string, respectively; and q maps binary pairs of strings into the unit interval.
in the exchangeable graph model, the number of bits, k, captures the complexity of
the graph. for instance, for k < n the model provides a compression of the graph. for
directed graphs the function q is asymmetric in the arguments. the sparsity of the bit strings
is controlled by the parameter    > 0. a larger value of    leads to larger negative correlation
among the bits and thereby a sparser network. in such an exchangeable graph model there
are two main sources of variability: (i) the id203 of an edge decreases with the number
of bits k, as more complexity reduces the chances of an edge, and (ii) the id203 of an
edge increases with 1/  , as concentrating density in the corners of the unit k-hypercube
improves the chances of an edge. while this model does not quite    t the de   nition of non-
homogeneous models of bollob  as et al. [45], it is tractable enough to allow the analysis of
the giant component in (k,   ) space, by leveraging the branching process strategy developed
by durrett [91] (see the appendix at the end of the chapter). as in durrett   s analysis, the
3the hypercube distribution can be obtained using a hierarchical construction as follows. sample (cid:126)u    
normalk((cid:126)  ,   ), where u     rk and   ii =   ,   ij =    for i (cid:54)= j. then de   ne pi = (1 + e   ui)   1 for i = 1 . . . k.
the resulting density for (cid:126)p, where (cid:126)p     [0, 1]k is

(log((cid:126)p/(1     (cid:126)p))     (cid:126)  )(cid:48)      1 (log((cid:126)p/(1     (cid:126)p))     (cid:126)  )

.

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:81)d
|2    |    1
j=1 pj(1     pj)

2

exp

   1
2

fp ((cid:126)p | (cid:126)  ,   ,   ) =

for more details see [4].

24

giant component emerges because a number of smaller components must intersect with high
id203.
in exchangeable graph models however, the giant component has a peculiar
structure; connected components are themselves connected to form the giant component as
soon as bit strings that match on two bits appear with high id203. figure 3.1 provides
a graphical illustration of this intuition. nodes that bridge two connected components are

figure 3.1: left panel. an example adjacency matrix that correspond to a fully connected
component among 100 nodes. right panel. the id91 coe   cient as a function of    on a
sequence of graphs with 100 nodes. here    = 12, and log(  i) = 1

k for every i = 1 . . . k.

evident in the left panel. note that there are no nodes that bridge three components, as bit
strings that match on three bits is an unlikely event in a graph with 100 nodes.

given a graph, we can infer the corresponding set of binary strings from data. the

likelihood that correspond to an exchangeable graph model is simple to write,

(cid:90)

(cid:0)(cid:89)

(cid:96)(y |  ) =

d (cid:126)b1:n

pr (yn,m|(cid:126)bn,(cid:126)bm, q)

(cid:89)

pr ((cid:126)bn|  )(cid:1),

n,m

n

where    = ((cid:126)  ,   ,   ) or an appropriate set of parameters. we can apply standard id136
techniques [2; 9]. fitting an exchangeable graph model allows us to assess the complexity
of an observed graph, leveraging notions from id205. for instance, we can
use the minimum description length (mdl) principle to decide how many bits we need to
explain the observed connectivity patterns with high id203. we can also quantify how
much information is retained at di   erent bit-lengths, and plot the corresponding information
pro   le for k < n and an id178 histogram for any given value of k.

the exchangeable graph model allows for algorithmic comparison of any set of statistical
models that are proposed to summarize an observed graph. as an illustration, consider
an observed graph g and two alternative models a and b. rather than comparing how
well models a and b recover the degree distribution of g or other graph statistics, and
independently of whether it makes sense to directly compare the two likelihoods of a and b
(in fact, these models need not have a likelihood), we can proceed as follows.

25

1. given a graph g,    t models a(  a) and b(  b) to obtain an estimate of their parameters

  a

est and   b

est respectively.

2. sample m graphs at random from the support of a(  a

est) and b(  b

est).

3. compute the distributions of summary statistics based on notion from information
theory, such as information pro   le and id178 histogram, corresponding to the 2m
graphs sampled from a and b.

4. compare models in terms of the distribution on the statistics above, such as the com-

plexity of the two models    supports and their similarity to the complexity of g.

the exchangeable graph model also allows for evaluation of the distribution of the number
of bit strings with i matching bits, for any integer i < k. in theory this distribution leads to
expectations on the number of nodes that bridge i communities, where the members of each
community have only one out of i matching bits. in practice, we may want to specify k in
advance so that each bit corresponds to a well de   ned property. for instance, in applications
to biology, nodes may correspond to proteins and the k bits encode presence or absence of
speci   c protein domains. the distribution on the number of i matchings leads to p-values
that summarize how unexpected it is to observe binding events among a set of proteins that
share a certain combination of domains.

overall, the exchangeable graph model introduces weak dependences among the edges
of a random graph in a controlled fashion, which ultimately lead to a range of more struc-
tured connectivity patterns and enable model comparison strategies rooted in notions from
id205. the focus here is not on modeling per se. in fact, the model is kept
as simple as possible. rather, the focus is on modeling as a means to establish a technical
link between graph connectivity and node attributes. this technical link is useful to address
some of the issues listed in chapter 5. for more details see [5].

there exist other complex graph models in the network analysis literature that induce
exchangeable or partially exchangeable edges. we will discuss latent space models [146;
137] and stochastic blockmodels [236; 7; 9] as examples. these models can all be traced
back to an original analysis of multivariate sociometric relations, measurements of relations
represented as vectors rather than scalars, that was developed a few decades ago [103]. the
di   erence in these models and the exchangeable graph model lies in the interpretation of
the latent variables and in the goal of the analysis. latent space models interprets the
latent variables as latent positions in a social space, and blockmodels interpret the latent
membership vectors in terms of functional association or community membership. in the
exchangeable graph model, the latent binary strings do not carry semantic meaning, rather
they are mathematical artifacts that help to represent a graph and induce an expressive
parametric family of distributions [15; 165; 5]. most importantly, the exchangeable graph
model is meant to be a tool to represent and explore the space of connectivity patterns in
a smooth, principled semi-parametric fashion. in this regard, exchangeable graph models
di   er substantially from latent space models or stochastic blockmodels.

26

3.4 the p1 model for social networks

a conceptually separate thread of research developed in parallel in the statistics and social
sciences literature, starting with the introduction of the p1 model. consider a directed graph
on the set of n nodes. holland and leinhardt   s p1 model focuses on dyadic pairings and
keeps track of whether node i links to j, j to i, neither, or both. it contains the following
parameters:

      : a base rate for edge propagation,
      i (expansiveness): the e   ect of an outgoing edge from i,
      j (popularity): the e   ect of an incoming edge into j,
      ij (reciprocation/mutuality): the added e   ect of reciprocated edges.

let p (0, 0) be the id203 for the absence of an edge between i and j, pij(1, 0) the
id203 of i linking to j (   1    indicates the outgoing node of the edge), pij(1, 1) the
id203 of i linking to j and j linking to i. the p1 model posits the following probabilities
(see [149]):

log pij(0, 0) =   ij,
log pij(1, 0) =   ij +   i +   j +   ,
log pij(0, 1) =   ij +   j +   i +   ,
log pij(1, 1) =   ij +   i +   j +   j +   i + 2   +   ij.

(3.1)
(3.2)
(3.3)
(3.4)

in this representation of p1,   ij is a normalizing constant to ensure that the probabilities
for each dyad (i, j) add to 1. for our present purposes, assume that the dyad is in one
and only one of the four possible states. the reciprocation e   ect,   ij, implies that the odds
of observing a mutual dyad, with an edge from node i to node j and one from j to i, is
enhanced by a factor of exp(  ij) over and above what we would expect if the edges occured
independently of one another.

the problem with this general p1 representation is that there is a lack of identi   cation of
the reciprocation parameters. the following special cases of p1 are identi   able and of special
interest:

1.   i = 0,   j = 0, and   ij = 0. this is basically an erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model for

directed graphs: each directed edge has the same id203 of appearance.

2.   ij = 0, no reciprocal e   ect. this model e   ectively focuses solely on the degree distri-

butions into and out of nodes.

3.   ij =   , constant reciprocation. this was the version of p1 studied in depth by holland

and leinhardt using id113.

27

yi+  i +

y+j  j +

yijyji  ,

(3.5)

4.   ij =    +   i +   j, edge-dependent reciprocation. fienberg and wasserman [101, 102]
described this model and how to    nd maximum likelihood estimate for the parameters.

in the constant reciprocation setting, the elevated id203 of reciprocal edges does not
depend on the dyad, whereas edge-dependent reciprocation dictates multiplicative increases
of the reciprocation id203 based on node-speci   c parameters.

the likelihood function for the p1 model is clearly in exponential family form. for the

constant reciprocation version, we have
log p rp1(y)     y++   +

(cid:88)
statistics (msss) are yi+, y+j, and (cid:80)

i

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

j

ij

where a    +    denotes summing over the corresponding subscript. the minimal su   cient
ij yijyji. then using the usual exponential family
theory we know that the likelihood equations are found by setting the msss equal to their
expectations (cf. [308]). holland and leinhardt gave an explicit iterative algorithm for
solving these equations with the added constraints that the probabilities for each dyad add
to 1.

a major problem with the p1 and related models, recognized by holland and leinhardt,
is the lack of standard asymptotics to assist in the development of goodness-of-   t procedures
for the model. since the number of {  i} and {  j} increase directly with the number of nodes,
we have no consistency results for the maximum likelihood estimates, and no simple way
to test for    = 0, for example. a few ad hoc    xes have been suggested in literature, the
most direct of which deals with the problem by setting subsets of the {  i} and {  j} equal
to one another (see the discussion of blockmodels below) or by considering them as arising
from common prior distributions (see, e.g., [311]). fienberg et al. [104] recently suggested
the use of tools from algebraic statistics to    nd markov basis generators for the model and
the conditional distribution of the data given the msss.

fienberg and wasserman proposed a slightly di   erent dyad-based data representation
for the p1 model. conceptually, the dyad considers the two directed measurements together:
{dij = (yij, yji)}. in their work, they de   ne

(cid:40)

xijkl =

1 if d(yij, yji) = (k, l),
0 otherwise,

where k and l take the values of 1 or 0. this representation converts the dyad {dij =
(yij, yji)} into a 2    2 table with exactly one entry of 1 and the rest 0. now if we collect the
data for the n(n     1)/2 dyads together, they form an n    n    2    2 incomplete contingency
table with    structural    zeros down the diagonal of the n  n marginal (i.e., no self loops), and
   duplicate    data for each dyad above and below the diagonal. in this redundant 4-way table,
the model of no second-order interaction corresponds to p1 with constant reciprocation, and
the standard iterative proportional    tting algorithm4 can be used to compute the maximum

4for details on ipf for contingency tables, see [39; 99]

28

likelihood estimates. fienberg et al. [103] show that same type of contingency table rep-
resentation also works for the correlated p1 model for multiple relations, and meyer [213]
provides a technical statistical rational for these contingency table representations.

holland and leinhardt analyzed sampson   s monk dataset (c.f. subsection 2.2.1 and [259])
using the p1 model. fienberg et al. [103] analyzed an 8-relation version of the sampson data
(4 positive and 4 negative) using their multiple-relation generalizations of p1, but focusing
on an aggregation of the 18 monks into the three blocks identi   ed in [322]: a top-esteemed
block of 7 monks with an unambivalently positive attitude towards itself, in con   ict with a
more ambivalent block of 7, and a block of 4 outcasts and waiverers.

3.5

p2 models for social networks and their bayesian
relatives

in the statistical literature, the notion of    xed e   ects typically refers to a set of unknown
constant quantities, each of which is used to partly explain the variability of the observations
corresponding to a unit of analysis, e.g., an individual or a pair of individuals. this contrasts
the notion of random e   ects, which refers to a set of unknown variable quantities that serve
a similar purpose and are drawn from the same underlying distribution.
the p1 model treats expansiveness, {  i}, and popularity, {  j}, as    xed e   ects associated
with unique nodes in the network. often it makes more sense to think about the ensemble
of expansiveness and/or popularity e   ects as a sample drawn from some underlying distri-
bution, and then estimate the parameters of that distribution. this type of random e   ects
network model has been developed in a series of papers by snijders and his collaborators
and they refer to it as the p2 network model, e.g., see van duijn et al. [301]. it is reasonably
straightforward to take any of the multivariate variations on p1 and generate a family of
multi-level models with mixtures of    xed and random e   ects in the spirit of p2, e.g., see
zijlstra et al. [333].

bayesian extensions of frequentist approaches often involve positing a statistical model
for    xed e   ects, thus converting them into random e   ects. the principal distinction between
the p2 models and bayesian extensions of p1 is that, in the latter, the other unknown constant
quantities,   ,   ,   , may be also converted into random e   ects. furthermore, there may be
additional levels to the multilevel hierarchy in these models, and there are prior distributions
on the parameters at the highest level of the hierarchy (cf. gill and swartz [121]; wang and
wong [311]). it should come as no surprise that authors using the bayesian approach have
worked with monte carlo markov chain (mcmc) methods as have those using versions of
p2.

mcmc implementations of p2 models in stocnet5 are well-suited for networks with a
relatively large number of nodes, e.g., zijlstra et al. [333] study network data from 20 dutch
high schools with a total of 1,232 pupils.

5stocnet is a freestanding software package for the statistical analysis of social networks, available at

http://stat.gamma.rug.nl/stocnet/.

29

3.6 exponential random graph models

under the assumption that two possible edges are dependent only if they share a common
node,6 frank and strauss [110] proved the following characterization for the id203
distribution of undirected markov graphs:

{y = y} = exp

pr
  

  ksk(y) +    t (y) +   (  ,    )

y     y,

(3.6)

where    := {  k} and    are parameters,   (  ,    ) is the normalizing constant, and the statistics
sk and t are counts of speci   c structures such as edges, triangles, and k-stars:

(cid:16) n   1(cid:88)

k=1

(cid:17)

number of edges:
number of k-stars (k     2):

number of triangles:

s1(y) = (cid:80)
sk(y) = (cid:80)
t (y) = (cid:80)

1   i   j   n yij,

(cid:0)yi+

(cid:1),

k

1   i   n

1   i   j   h   n yij yih yjh.

note that there is a dependence structure to the parameters of this model, with edges being
contained in 2-stars, and 2-stars being contained in both triangles and three-stars. certain
variations of this ergm model that involve directed edges are natural generalizations of the
p1 model. alternative parameterizations that go beyond markov graph models have been
recently proposed, e.g., see [280; 317; 21].

frank and strauss [110] worked mainly with the three parameter model where   3, . . . ,   n   1 =

0. they proposed a pseudo-likelihood parameter estimation method [287] that maximizes

(cid:16)

{yij = yij | yuv = yuv for all u < v, (u, v) (cid:54)= (i, j)}(cid:17)

.

(cid:96)(  ) =

log

pr
  

(cid:88)

i<j

wasserman and pattison [316] proposed the current formulation of these exponential random
graph models (ergm), also referred to as p    models, as a generalization of the markov
graphs of frank and strauss. for both directed and undirected graphs, they maintain a
similar characterization of the probabilities where the statistics sk and t are replaced by
arbitrary statistics u . this leads to likelihood functions of the form

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

{y = y} = exp

pr
  

  (cid:62)u(y)       (  )

.

(3.7)

the statistics u(y) are counts of graph structures. although they are not independent   
they count overlapping sets of edges   they are assumed independent in the pseudo-likelihood.
ignoring these correlations is a bad idea; it causes extreme sensitivity of the predicted number
of edges to small changes in the value of certain parameters [302]. park and newman [240]
formally characterized sensitivity issues. snijders et al. [280] recently proposed a variant of

6this is the de   nition of markov property for spatial processes on a lattice in [33].

30

these models where the major problem of double-counting is mitigated but not overcome.
hunter and handcock [155] estimate likelihood ratios for nearby {  i} using a mcmc proce-
dure related to the work of geyer and thompson [118]. their estimation procedure can be
used for models based on distributions in the curved exponential family.

robins et al. [256] describe problems associated with the estimation of parameters in
many ergms, involving near degeneracies of the likelihood function and thus of methods
used to estimate parameters using maximum likelihood. for example, for a certain com-
bination of ergm statistics, the likelihood function may have multiple, clearly distinct
modes, and there are very few network con   gurations   often radically di   erent from each
other   that have non-zero probabilities. this is a topic of current theoretical and empirical
investigation rooted in the theory of discrete exponential families [136; 251]. for a discus-
sion of mixing times of mcmc methods for ergms and the relevance to convergence and
degeneracies, see [35].

there are two carefully constructed packages of routines that are available for analyzing
network data using ergms: statnet7 and siena8. these packages focus on the use of
mcmc methods for estimating the parameters in ergms.

it is possible to express the current formulation of exponential random graphs
remark.
using the formalism of undirected id114 and the hammersley-cli   ord theorem
[76; 33]. we can write the likelihood of an arbitrary undirected graph as

pr(y|  ) =

c   c   (yc|  c)

,

non-normalized potentials over the cliques, and z = (cid:80)(cid:81)

where yc denotes the nodes in clique c,   c denotes the corresponding set of parameters,    are
c   c   (yc|  c) is the id172
constant. if the likelihood is in the exponential family, then the log potentials are linear in
  c and    features    u(yc), and we can write:

z

(3.8)

(cid:111)

(cid:111)

pr(y|  ) = exp

= exp

= exp

log   (yc|  c)     log z

c u(yc)     log z
(cid:111)
  (cid:62)

c   c
  (cid:62)u(y)     log z

.

(cid:81)

(cid:110)(cid:88)
(cid:110)(cid:88)
(cid:110)

c   c

within the exponential family, the advantage is that computing derivatives and likelihood
and deriving the corresponding em algorithm are feasible, although possibly computationally
expensive, by using variational approximation strategies and monte carlo methods. a lot
of methodology on the subject has been developed in the area of machine learning. there,

7a package written for the r statistical environment described at http://csde.washington.edu/

statnet/. see also the documentation in [138; 157; 224; 129].

8simulation investigation for empirical network analysis   a freestanding package available at http:

//stat.gamma.rug.nl/snijders/siena.html.

31

undirected graphs appear primarily in the context of relational learning and imaging. for an
in-depth discussion on exact and approximation methods and for references see [247; 308].

3.7 random graph models with fixed degree distri-

bution

the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert random graph model is fully symmetric and the expected degree
(the number of edges associated with a node) is the same for all nodes in the graph, following
a binomial distribution. a number of natural extensions of the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model
result in varying node degrees. for example,

    the preferential attachment model [26] captures the formation of hubs in a graph (see

section 4.1);

    the one-parameter    small-world    model [320] interpolates between an ordered    nite-
dimensional lattice and an erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert random graph in order to produce local
id91 and triadic closures (see section 4.2).

albert and barab  asi [12] describe a number of variants on these themes. many of the
investigators exploring the use of such models often focus on the empirical degree dis-
tribution, claiming for example that it follows a power-law in many real world networks
(cf. [26; 232; 69; 91]). the papers utilizing these    statistical physics    style models often
talk about    xed-degree distributions [e.g., 239], and they either    x the degree-distribution
parameters or compute distributions that are conditional on some function of the degree
distributions or sequences, such as their expectations (cf. [235; 70]). software is available to
sample from the space of random graphs with a given degree distribution based on monte
carlo markov chain methods [42; 138].

there would appear to be a direct link between these ideas and the representation of
degree distributions in the family of p1 models.
in the latter, the   i and   i parameters
represent the out-degree and in-degree for the ith node, and the corresponding su   cient
statistics are the empirical values for these. in the statistical literature there is a long tradi-
tion of looking at distributions conditional on minimal su   cient statistics, and for network
models such a notion was investigated as early as 1975 by holland and leinhardt, who looked
at the version of p1 with    = 0, conditioned on the empirical in-degree and out-degree for
all nodes in the network [147]. this allows for the calculation of an exact distribution that
is independent of the {  i} and {  i} by enumerating all possible adjacency matrices in the
reference set with the observed in-degrees and out-degrees. there is the expectation that
such an approach could lead to a uniformly most powerful test for    = 0, but there is no
theory to support this expectation as of yet. mcdonald, smith and forster [211] suggest an
iterative approach for such calculations using a metropolis-hastings algorithm to generate
from the conditional distribution of the triad census given the indegrees, the out-degrees and
the number of mutual dyads. in a pair of papers [279; 280], snijders and colleagues explore
such conditioning for id113 for exponential random graph models,

32

largely as a mechanism for avoiding the degeneracies and near degeneracies observed when
unconditional maximum likelihood is used, cf. section 3.6 and [256]. snijders [274] does
something similar for dynamic models for graphs. roberts [252] suggests an algorithm for
the conditional distribution of the p1 model where   ij =    given the full set of minimal su   -
cient statistics, but mcdonald et al. [211] o   er a counterexample and suggest an alteration
of their algorithm to generate the proper exact distribution. generating such exact distri-
butions is a very tricky matter in discrete exponential families because of the need to utilize
appropriate markov bases, either explicitly as in diaconis and sturmfels [85] or implicitly.
it is unclear whether the proposals in this literature are in fact reaching all possible tables
associated with the distribution.

blitzstein and diaconis [42] explore di   erent e   cient mechanisms for generating random
graphs with    xed degree sequence and explicitly make the link between the    statistical
physics    and    sociological    literatures, whereas the earlier papers by newman [232] and
park and newman [239] reference exponential random graphs but only approach the notion of
   xed degree distributions from a statistical physics perspective, focusing on characteristics of
network ensembles rather that id113 and assessment of goodness-
of-   t.

3.8 blockmodels, stochastic blockmodels and com-

munity discovery

a problem which has been a focus of attention for at least 40 years in the network literature
has been the search for an    optimal partition    of the nodes into groups or blocks. in the
sociometric literature this was known as blockmodeling. a formalization of networks in terms
of non-stochastic blocks goes back at least as far as lorrain and white [199]. their paper
and the discussion of structural equivalence gave rise to innumerable papers in mathematical
sociology, (see, e.g., [53]) and algorithmic search strategies for determining blocks (see, e.g.,
[19; 88; 89]). by embedding these ideas within a framework of random graphs, holland et al.
[150] explained how a special version of p1 could be used to describe a random graph model
with prede   ned blocks. (see also the related discussion in [103] and [311].)

a true stochastic blockmodel approach, however, involves the discovery of the block struc-
ture as part of the model search strategy [314], and the    rst attempts at doing this within
the framework of p1 and its exponential family generalizations was due to nowicki and sni-
jders, who focused on technical issues such as non-identi   ability in a restricted version of the
blockmodel [277; 236; 237; 79]. a comprehensive statistical treatment of these models was
recently developed for analyzing protein interaction data [7; 8] and then further developed in
the context of social network data [9]. handcock et al. [137] approach this stochastic block-
modeling problem through a combination of latent space models and traditional id91.
we decribe some of this work in more detail below.

more recently in the statistical physics and computer science literatures the problem
has gone under the label of detection of community structure, e.g., see [122; 232; 71; 233;

33

266; 217]. this literature is now voluminous and seemingly unconnected to the statistical
blockmodel work.

the basic idea, in both the model-based and algorithmic approaches as well as the com-
munity detection literature, is that nodes that are heavily interconnected should form a
block or community. the nodes are reordered to display the blocks down the diagonal of
the adjacency matrix representing the network. moreover, the connections between nodes
in di   erent blocks appear in much sparser o   -diagonal blocks. in model-based approaches,
the partition of the nodes maximizes a statistical criterion linked to the model, e.g., a like-
lihood function, whereas most algorithmic solutions maximize ad hoc criteria related to the
   density    of links within and between blocks.

more formally, a blockmodel is a model of network data that relies on the intuitive
notion of structural equivalence: two nodes are de   ned to be structurally equivalent if their
connectivity with similar nodes is similar   this is a    soft    de   nition.9 following up this idea,
we can imagine collapsing structurally equivalent nodes together to form a super-node, or a
block in the language of blockmodels. keeping the notion of a block in mind we can now
revisit and sharpen the de   nition of structurally equivalent nodes: given n nodes and k
blocks, let yn  n be the adjacency matrix of the graph g(n ,y), then two nodes a and b are
structurally equivalent, and thus belong to the same block h, if their connectivity patterns
ca and cb with nodes in other blocks are similar. the equivalence between connectivity
patterns of nodes a and b can be formally stated as follows:

ca    (cid:8) y (a, i     hk) :    hk (cid:54)= h(cid:9)     cb,

where the index i runs over the nodes other than a, b, the index k runs over the blocks other
than h, hk is the set of nodes in block k, and     quanti   es similarity according to a suitable
distance metric. this de   nition relies on a pre-speci   ed partitioning of the n nodes into k
blocks. a blockmodel is useful, for instance, in the analysis of social relations where blocks
may correspond to social factions, as well as in the analysis of protein interactions where
blocks may correspond to stable protein complexes.

collapsing nodes into blocks by leveraging the notion of structural equivalence above is
a more general task than id91. consider, for example, the green nodes 7   9 in the left
panel of figure 3.2. they are structurally equivalent according to the de   nition above, as
c7     c8     c9, although there are no direct connections among the nodes 7   9 themselves. in
this sense, nodes 7   9 would not represent a tight cluster according to measures of similarity
based on direct connectivity. blocks that would correspond to clusters can be obtained by
pre-specifying an identity blockmodel, b = ik, in which all o   -diagonal blocks equal zero
and all diagonal blocks equal one.
at the technical level, we need two sets of parameters in order to instantiate a blockmodel:
(i) the blockmodel itself, b, is a k    k matrix, in which the b(g, h) entry speci   es, for
instance, the average id203 that nodes in block g have connections directed to nodes
in block h, and (ii) a mapping between nodes and blocks, (cid:126)  1:n =   , where the node-
speci   c array summarizes some notion of membership. airoldi et al. [9], for instance, specify

9the term stochastic equivalence is often used in place of structural equivalence, e.g., see [315].

34

figure 3.2: left: an example graph. right: the corresponding blockmodel, where red
nodes have been collapsed into the red block and similarly for the other colors. note that
this problem is not a typical id91 problem, as the green nodes do not share any direct
connections; each green node, however, has connections directed to blue nodes, and con-
nections directed from red nodes. in other words, given the partition into monochromatic
blocks, the nodes in the green block share patterns of connectivity to nodes in other blocks.

the mapping in terms of mixed membership arrays, in which   n(h) speci   es the relative
frequency of interactions. node n participates in 2n-2 interactions in total and instantiates
connectivity patterns that are typical of nodes in its block. these two sets of parameters, b
and   , are two latent sources of variability that compete to explain the observed connectivity.
however, the blockmodel b explains global asymmetric block connectivity patterns, while
the (mixed) membership mapping    explains node-speci   c symmetric connectivity patterns.
in this sense, instantiating a blockmodel in terms of b and    does not introduce any source
of non-identi   ability beyond the usual multiplicity of parametric con   gurations that lead to
exactly the same likelihood   well characterized in this model by nowicki and snijders [236].
as a concrete example, consider the mixed membership stochastic blockmodel (mmb)
introduced by [9]; the data generating process for a graph g = (n , y ) is the following.

1. for each node p     n :

1.1 sample mixed membership (cid:126)  p     dirichlet k

2. for each pair of nodes (p, q)     n    n :

(cid:0) (cid:126)  (cid:1).

2.1 sample membership indicator, (cid:126)zp   q     mult k((cid:126)  p).
2.2 sample membership indicator, (cid:126)zp   q     mult k((cid:126)  q).
2.3 sample interaction, y (p, q)     bern ((cid:126)z (cid:62)
p   qb (cid:126)zp   q).

note that the group membership of each node is context dependent. that is, each node
may assume di   erent membership when interacting or being interacted with by di   erent
peers. statistically, each node is an admixture of group-speci   c interactions. the two sets of
latent group indicators are denoted by {(cid:126)zp   q : p, q     n} =: z    and {(cid:126)zp   q : p, q     n} =: z   .

35

1 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 7 (7,8,9) (1,2,3) (4,5,6) (cid:90)

(cid:90)

also note that the pairs of group memberships that underlie interactions need not be equal;
this fact is useful for characterizing asymmetric interaction networks. equality may be
enforced when modeling symmetric interactions.

id136 in the blockmodel is challenging, as the integrals that need to be solved to

compute the likelihood cannot be evaluated analytically. for simplicity, the likelihood is

(cid:96)(y | (cid:126)  , b) =

pr(y | z, b) pr(z |   ) pr(   | (cid:126)  ) dz d  .

  

z

while the inner integral is easily solvable10, the outer integral is not. exact id136 is thus
not an option. to complicate things, the number of observations scales as the square of
the number of nodes, o(n 2). sampling algorithms such as monte carlo markov chains are
typically too slow for real-size problems in the natural, social, and computational sciences.
airoldi et al. [9] suggest a nested variational id136 strategy to approximate the posterior
distribution on the latent variables, (  , z). (variational methods scale to large problems
without loosing much in terms of accuracy [3; 49; 308].)

bickel and chen [37], the most recent contribution to this literature, brings new twists
to the model-based approach of community discovery. they use a blockmodel to formalize a
given network in terms of its community structure. the main result of this work implies that
community detection algorithms based on the modularity score of newman and girvan [122]
are (asymptotically) biased. it shows that using modularity scores can lead to the discovery
of an incorrect community structure even in the favorable case of large graphs, where com-
munities are substantial in size and composed of many individuals. this work also proves
that blockmodels and the corresponding likelihood-based algorithms are (asymptotically)
unbiased and lead to the discovery of the correct community structure. the proof relies on
the exchangeability results developed in the statistics community [15; 165] applied to paired
measurements [84].

3.9 latent space models
the intuition at the core of latent space models is that each node i     n can be represented
as a point zi in a    low dimensional    space, say rk. the existence of an edge in the adjacency
matrix, y (i, j) = 1, is determined by the distance among the corresponding pair of nodes in
the low dimensional space, d(zi, zj), and by the values of a number of covariates measured
on each node individually. the latent space model was    rst introduced by ho    et al. [146]
with applications to social network analysis, and has been recently extended in a number
of directions to include treatment of transitivity, homophily on node-speci   c attributes,
id91, and heterogeneity of nodes [144; 137; 183].

10the inner integral resolves into a series of sums, each one over the support of an individual (cid:126)z variable.
the support is the same for all such (cid:126)z variables, and it is given by the n vertices of the k-dimensional unit
hypercube. in other words, the inner integral is a series of sums, each over the same n elements.

36

the id155 model for the adjacency matrix y is
pr(y (i, j) | zi, zj, xij,   ),

pr(y | z, x,   ) =

(cid:89)

i(cid:54)=j

where x are covariates,    are parameters, and z are the positions of nodes in the low di-
mensional latent space. each relationship y (i, j) is sampled from a bernoulli distribution
whose natural parameter depends on zi, zj, xij and   . in their model, ho    et al. [146] gen-
erated the paired observations y (i, j) starting from the relevant pair of node representations,
(zi, zj), through a distance model, pair speci   c covariates xij, and parameters    = (  ,   ).
the log-odds ratio is then:

log

pr(y (i, j) = 1)
1     pr(y (i, j) = 1)

=    +   (cid:48)xij     |zi     zj|       ij,

and the corresponding log likelihood is
log pr(y |   ) =

(cid:88)

n(cid:54)=m

(cid:0)   ij    yij     log(1 + e  ij )(cid:1) .

one can easily extend the latent space modeling approach to weighted networks. in the
general case, paired observations y may be modeled using a generalized linear model that
makes use of z1:n xij, and   . following the formalism in [210], a generalized linear model
that generates the observed edge weights can be speci   ed in terms of three quantitative
elements:

i. the error model pr(yij), i.e., the model for the observed edge weights with mean   ij =

e[yij];

ii. the linear model   ij =   ij(  , zi, zj);

iii. the link function g(  ij) =   ij, which maps the support of   ij to that of   ij   typically

r.

  ij
1     ij

g(  ij) = log (cid:0)

(cid:1), with its inverse being   ij =

for example, in the binary graph, the error model is pr(yij) = bern(  ij), where   ij     [0, 1]
for all node pairs (i, j)     n ; the linear model is   ij =    + d(zi, zj); the link function is
1+exp(     ij ) [146]. in a graph with non-
negative, integer edge weights, we can posit pr(yij) = poi (  ij), where   ij     r+ for all node
pairs (i, j)     n ; the linear model is   ij =    + d(zi, zj), the same as in the previous example;
the link function is g(  ij) = log(  ij), and its inverse is   ij = e  ij .
distance model d in the latent space z:

in the general case, the generalized linear model for   ij may also include an explicit

1

  ij =   ij
=   ij

(cid:0)   , zi, zj
(cid:1)
(cid:0)   , d(zi, zj)(cid:1) .

37

note that it is possible to re-parametrize zi =   i  i to separate the position in a latent
reference space,    , from its magnitude,   i, a scalar. it is a simple intuition that suggests the
use of an explicit distance model in the latent space. in a binary graph, for example, edges
are more likely to be generated between pairs of nodes whose representations in the latent
space are close. a popular choice of distance measures is euclidean distance. estimation
can be done via mcmc sampling.

id136 in latent space models has been carried out via monte carlo markov chain in
networks with up to several thousand nodes [130]. scalability issues remain to be addressed
before larger networks can be analyzed.

3.9.1 comparison with stochastic blockmodels

the latent space model of ho    et al. [146] projects nodes onto a latent euclidean space by
inverting the logistic link. while in practice there is often interest in identifying groups of
similar nodes, e.g. individuals or proteins, there is no explicit id91 model in the latent
space. to identify groups of similar nodes, id91 methods must be used to analyze the
set of latent positions inferred by the latent space model. to allow joint id136 on latent
positions and clusters, handcock et al. [137] introduce an explicit id91 model in the
latent space in the form of a mixture of (spherical) gaussians.

(cid:26) pr(y | z, x,   ) = (cid:81)
zi     (cid:80)

i(cid:54)=j pr(y (i, j) | zi, zj, xij,   ),
k n (  k,   2

k    i).

this model combines the original latent space model [146] with a    nite mixture of gaussians
approach to id91 [297; 205]. it posits that the latent positions zi     rd come from a
k-dimensional mixture model.

this extension is related to the stochastic blockmodel of [9], which posits a latent mem-
bership vector for each node. these vectors can be viewed as cluster assignment probabilities
for each node. the observed binary relationships between nodes are mediated by per-pair
latent variables, each drawn conditioned on a node   s mixed membership vector. in its gen-
eral form, the blockmodel allows for multiple relations and covariates. similarly, the model
in [137] is also a hierarchical model, as a gaussian distribution is placed on the latent posi-
tions zi. in contrast, however, each node belongs to a single cluster and the corresponding
partition governs the observed relationships. there can be variance in the latent position
variables, but the idea of belonging to two or more groups cannot be represented. posterior
uncertainty about cluster membership is di   erent from having an explicit distribution that
controls mixed membership, which carries with it an additional level of uncertainty. with
that said, the latent space in which nodes are projected in [137] is somewhat comparable to
the space of cluster proportions in [9]. the former maps nodes to a euclidean space, while
the latter maps nodes to the simplex.

both models share the same goal: inferring latent structure that explains the variability
of the connectivity in an observed network. in the mixed membership model, full mcmc
for any but the simplest problems is unreasonably expensive. airoldi et al. [9] appeal to

38

variational methods for a computationally e   cient approximation to the posterior. these
methods can scale to large matrices (e.g., millions of nodes) because of the simpli   ed approxi-
mation, but at an unknown cost to accuracy. it would be interesting to explore computational
tradeo   s for the latent space cluster model [137] as the sample size grows and when large
numbers of covariates are added.

remark. blei and fienberg [40] argue that a stochastic blockmodel and node-speci   c
mixed membership vectors are two sets of parameters that are directly interpretable in terms
of notions and concepts relevant to social scientists, and better suited to assist these scientists
in extracting substantive knowledge from noisy data, to ultimately inform or support the
development of new hypotheses and theories.

applying the mixed membership stochastic blockmodel (mmb) to sampsons data demon-
strates both similarities and di   erences [2]. for instance, bic suggests the existence of three
factions among the 18 monks when    tting the mmb, but the groupings di   er from those
found by the latent space cluster model. one major bene   t of applying mixed membership
model to the data is the ability to quantitatively identify two out of three of the novices that
sampson labeled as waverers in his analysis based on anthropological observations. this
could lead to the formation of a social theory of failure in isolated communities, with a
possibility to be con   rmed with real longitudinal data [2].

in the sociology literature, certain speci   cations of blockmodels are referred to as la-
tent class models, and certain speci   cations of latent space models are referred to as latent
distance models. ho    [145] provides a nice comparison, both theoretical and empirical, of
these two types of models with the eigenmodel. the eignemodel is based on a singular
value decomposition of the socio-matrix, it can capture more connectivity patterns than the
latent class and the latent distance models, for a given degree of model complexity, which
can be the number of classes, the number of dimensions in the latent space, or the number
of eigenvectors. there is a price to pay, however. the eigenmodel is the least amenable
to interpretation among the three models, as the inferred patters that capture connectivity
are in terms of eigenvectors. the latent space model can be interpreted in terms of dis-
tances. the latent class models can be interpreted in terms of blocks of connectivity, or
tight micro-communities; this is the easiest model to interpret.

appendix: phase transition behavior of the erd  os-r  enyi-
gilbert model

a simple way to analyze the phrase transition behavior of erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert models at    =
1 is to study the emergence of the giant component as a branching process [91]. intuitively,
consider branching processes that start at every node: for certain values of    all the branching
processes will keep growing with high id203. their supports, i.e., the sets of nodes
involved in each process, will intersect with high id203, leading to the emergence of the

39

giant component, g, in which each node can be reached from every other node.
the following formal argument comes from lecture notes by guetz and constantine [133]
based on proofs given by janson et al. [161]. pick a node v     n . if v is connected to all of
the nodes in g, then we say that v is saturated in g. now work as follows: pick a node v and
place it on the list. then, identify all its neighbors in g, and add them to the list. next,
take the    rst unsaturated node on the list and add to the list all of its neighbors which are
not already in it. the proof is constructed by considering the distribution of the number
of nodes an unsaturated node adds to the list and by using cherno    bounds to bound the
size of the connected component each node belongs to. for details on this proof please see
[43].
bollob  as et al. [45] carried out an extensive analysis of the phase transition that
mathematically characterizes emergence of the giant component in inhomogeneous random
graphs.

40

chapter 4

dynamic models for longitudinal
data

in chapter 3 we focused on models for static networks, that consider a cross-section of a real
network at a given point in time. however, real networks often contain a dynamic component.
in the language of networks, dynamics can be translated into the birth and death of edges
and nodes. for example, in a friendship network, new nodes may be introduced at any time
and old nodes may drop out due to inactivity; links of friendships and alliances may be
even more brittle. dynamic network modeling has been a neglected sibling of static network
modeling, partly due to the added complexity and partly due to a lack of datasets to study.
sampson   s monastery study [259] produced one of the earliest datasets with information on
the dynamics in the network of the 18 initiates. the original research, however, focused on the
network structure at each given time point, rather than modeling the underlying dynamics
explicitly. as online communities gain in popularity, we are beginning to get access to an
increasing number of dynamic network datasets of much larger size and longer time span. at
the same time, advances in statistical and computational methods for id136 and learning
have enabled development of richer models. bearing this in mind, in this chapter we consider
three di   erent classes of models. we begin by revisiting the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert random
graph model and its generalizations, viewing them as models for dynamic processes. then
we turn to continuous time markov process models (cmpm) and their discrete time cousins
(such as a dynamic version of ergm and other recently proposed models).

4.1 random graphs and the preferential attachment

model

many variations on the classical erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert random graph model in section 3.2 are
typically considered to be static models, in that they model a single, static snapshot of the
network, as opposed to multiple snapshots recorded at di   erent time steps. however, they
also contain processes for link addition and modi   cation, which is a dynamic process that may
have generated the observed graph, though there is no attempt to    t these dynamic model

41

properties to observed data. for this reason, we view them as    pseudo-dynamic    models
and discuss three examples here: the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model, preferential attachment
model, and small-world models.

for example, we can view the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model g(n, e), itself as a dynamic

process used to generate a random graph:

    start from the graph of n unconnected nodes at time 0;
    at each subsequent time step, add a di   erent edge to the network with id203

p = e/(cid:0)n

(cid:1).

2

by convention, we usually    x the number of nodes at n , although we can extend the process
to allow for addition of nodes. this model assumes that edges (and nodes) are not removed
once they are added. the degree distribution for g(n, e) is binomial. but as n gets large,
n p tends to a constant, so it is approximately poisson. durrett [91] provides a rich discussion
for situating this dynamic description with the tradition of discrete time id93 and
branching processes. in particular, he uses this representation to explore the emergence of
the giant component described in section 3.2 (see appendix of chapter 3).

the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model is simple and easy to study but does not address many
issues present in real network dynamics. one of the major criticisms [26] of this model
centers on the fact that it does not produce a scale-free network, i.e., the resulting node
degree distribution does not follow a power law. the network literature is replete with
claims that many real networks exhibit the power-law phenomenon, (cf.
[12]), and much
subsequent research has focused on how various generalizations of the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert
model conform to the power law degree distribution. molloy and reed [219] were the    rst
to describe how to construct graphs with a general degree distribution and they went on to
describe the emergence of the giant component in that context as well [220].

barab  asi and albert [26] described a dynamic preferential attachment (pa) model specif-
ically designed to generate scale-free networks. at time 0, the model starts out with n0
unconnected nodes. at each subsequent time step, a new node is added with m     n0 edges.
the id203 that the new node is connected to an existing node is proportional to the
degree of the latter. in other words, the new node picks m nodes out of the existing network
according to the multinomial distribution

  i(cid:80)

,

j   j

pi =

where   i denotes the (undirected) degree of node i. this model, which was described much
earlier in the statistical literature by yule [329] and simon [269], is intended to describe
networks that grow from a small nucleus of nodes and follow a    rich-get-richer    scheme.
the assumption is that, for instance, a new web page will more likely link via a url to
a well-known web page as opposed to a little-known one. mitzenmacher [218] gives a brief
history of generative models for power law distributions.

the preferential attachment model of barab  asi and albert results in a network with
a power law degree distribution whose exponent is empirically determined to be   ba =

42

2.9    0.1, whereas the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model has a poisson degree distribution. many
extensions of the model have been proposed that allow for    exible power-law exponents,
edge modi   cations, non-uniform dependence on the node degree distributions, etc. for
example, dorogovtsev and mendes [90] proposed that creating an edge to node i should
be proportional not just to its degree ki but also to its age, decaying as (t     ti)     , where
   is a tunable parameter. this leads to a power law degree distribution only if    < 1.
barab  asi et al. [28] and durrett [91] provide an account of this and other extensions to the
original model of albert and barab  asi. alternative graph generation mechanisms appear
every day   r   mat [60],   winners don   t take all    [242],   forest    re    [194],   butter   y    [212] and
rtg [10], to name a few. the latest, rtg model, proves conformance to 11 empirical laws
observed in real networks. the main goal of these random graph models is to describe
a process that could generate networks emulating certain known network properties. the
generative process could then give an insight into the dynamics that led to the observed
network. but these models are often applied to network data are gathered at a few points
in time (sometimes only once). thus the networks are often examined statically.

it has been recently pointed out that, contrary to previous claims, the empirical laws
that generative models aim to emulate are not always supported by real data. visual com-
parison are not su   cient for determining the goodness of    t of a model. for example, a lot
of attention has recently been paid to the degree distribution. figure 4.1 shows indegree and
outdegree distributions for blog and query databases from an unnamed large company. they
are plotted on a log-log scale and the downward slopes, if    tted by straight lines, would be
visually similar to power law distributions with exponents less than 2. a careful examination
of these plots, however, reveals a curvilinear relationship in all cases, which suggests that
there is a di   erent generating process than those usually used to justify power laws in em-
pirical network data. data such as that displayed in figure 4.1 are often    tted by ordinary
least squares or even by eye; often the claim is that a degree distribution is scale-free except
for a cuto    at very high or very low degrees, without any adjustment for searching for a
cuto   ! there have been a number of recent e   orts to assess the    t of degree distributions,
such as those associated with power laws in log-log plots, with more rigor, e.g., see [74]. as
in this example, results from such careful assessments of    t often contradict the assumption
of linearity.

li et al. [196] give a    structural metric    for examining simple connected graphs having
identical degree distributions and derive theoretical properties of scale-free graphs. they
provide at least one possible way to assess whether a graph corresponding to a network is
in fact scale-free. for more informal discussions related to this theoretical work, see [14;
324]. flaxman et al. [106; 107] describe a class of network models linked to the preferential
attachment model that also yield a power-law degree distribution.

most descriptions of generative models fall short of studying the full parameter space and
do not propose procedures for    tting the proposed methods to real data, though there are a
few works that suggest maximum likelihood, mcmc and other frameworks for    tting these
models to data (for e.g.
[34; 75; 214; 323]). one of the notable exceptions is work based
on kronecker graph multiplication. what started as yet another generative procedure [192]

43

figure 4.1: log-log plots of degree distributions for a query data bases and a blog data base
from a company database. left: blog indegree and outdegree distributions. right: query
indegree and outdegree distributions. source: data from an unnamed large company, stored
in ilab, carnegie mellon university.

has turned into a well analyzed methodology [195] with an e   cient algorithm for model
   tting, analysis of the parameter space, and model selection. this work goes further in
understanding real network structure and provides a way for principled graph sampling.

4.2 small-world models

watts and strogatz [320] proposed a small-world model which can be thought of as a    pseudo-
dynamic    model in the sense we described in section 4.1. this one-parameter    small-world   
model interpolates between an ordered    nite-dimensional lattice and an erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert
random graph in order to produce local id91 and triadic closures. bollob  as and chung
[44] had previously noted that adding random edges to a ring of n nodes drastically reduces
the diameter of the network. the watts-strogatz model begins with a ring lattice with n
nodes and k edges per node, and randomly rewires each edge with id203 p. as p goes
from 0 to 1, the construction moves toward an erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert model. they and others
who followed, studied the behavior of such small-world networks when 0 < p < 1. this
model is not dynamic although it is often used to describe networks that evolve over time.
figure 4.2 shows a small-world graph for n = 25 nodes and 2 rewirings per node.

kleinberg [174] introduced a variation on the small-world model where random edges are
added to a    xed grid. starting with an underlying    nite-dimensional grid, he added shortcut
edges, where the id203 that two nodes are connected by a long edge depends on the
distance between them in the grid. more precisely, the id203 that two non-adjacent
nodes x and y are connected is proportional to d(x, y)     . with    set to the dimension
of the lattice, the greedy routing algorithm can    nd paths from one node to another in a
polylogarithmic number of expected steps.

44

figure 4.2: small-world graph for n = 25 nodes and 2 rewirings per node. the red edges
form the ring lattice and the blue edges the rewiring. this graph was generated using the
java applet at http://cs.gmu.edu/~astavrou/smallworld.html

several follow-up works have made adjustments to kleinberg   s rewiring procedure in
attempt to improve the understanding and e   ciency of the navigability of networks. for
example, clauset and moore [72] suggested to rewire a long distance edge from node x, if
while performing a greedy walk over to y, the original topology of the network did not allow
to reach y within tthresh steps. the edge was rewired to the place where the search gave
up (the node reached after tthresh steps of the walk).they show that through this rewiring
procedure the network degree distribution converges to a power law, where    =   rewired.
their work also studied    nite size e   ects and showed that   opt     d, as n         rather
slowly.

sandberg [260, 261] and sandberg and clarke [262] introduced a di   erent rewiring scheme
with the end goal to make the network more amenable to statistical analysis. starting with
n nodes on a ring, each with two neighbor links and a long range link, the model of sandberg
[260] randomly rewires a graph in the following steps:

    at each time step j = 1, 2, 3, . . . , choose a random starting node x and a target node

y and perform greedy routing from x to y;

    independently and with (small) id203 x, update the long-range link of each node

on the resulting path to point to y.

45

this de   nes a markov chain on a collection of labeled graphs. sandberg and clarke [262]
conjecture that when the chain achieves stationarity, the distribution of distances spanned
by long-range links is (close to) theoretical optimum for search and the expected length of
searches is polylogarithmic. they support the conjecture by a series of simulations. this
methodology has been applied to the study of peer-to-per (p2p) networks.

durrett [91] discusses links between small-world models and stochastic processes. typical
usage of small-world models include empirical analyses involving aggregate summary statis-
tics (see, e.g., [18; 231]). there are as yet no formal statistical methods for examining the
evolution of small-world network models and for assessing their    t to network data measured
over time.

4.3 duplication-attachment models

duplication-attachment models were originally developed in the computer science theory
community to study the world wide web as a directed graph [175; 185]. these models aim
at describing properties of a snapshot of the web graph at a speci   c time, that is, a static
directed graph. the data generating process underlying these models, however, is explicitly
dynamic. the following example demonstrates some basic assumptions behind the dynamics.
consider a newly added web page a, which provides a new node in the web graph. the
creator of web page a will then add hyper-links to it, which provide new directed edges in the
web graph. in particular, some of these hyper-links will point to other web pages regardless
of whether their topical content matches the topical content of web page a, but most of these
hyper-links will point to web pages with a topical content that closely matches the topical
content of web page a.

technically, there are many possible speci   cations and variants. the basic duplication-
attachment model proposed and analyzed by kumar et al. [185] is as follows. denote the
graph at time t as gt = (nt,et). at each step, say t + 1, one new node n is added to gt.
the new node is connected to a prototype node m, chosen uniformly at random among those
in nt. then d out-links are added to node n . the ith out-link is chosen as follows: with
id203    the destination node is chosen uniformly at random among those in nt, and
with id203 1        the destination node is taken to be the ith out-link of the prototype
node m. note that this is possible since the algorithm generates a constant degree graph.
rather than proposing estimation strategies for the two parameters (  , d) of this particular
duplication-attachment model, the goal of the analysis of kumar et al. [185] is on deriving
results about topological properties of duplication-attachment graphs, described as functions
of the two parameters (  , d). recent extensions of this model include a model where frac-
tions of both out-links and in-links of the prototype node m are copied by the newly added
node n [193]. the goal of the analyses in this line of research, however, remains that of
replicating properties of observed graphs, with a few exceptions. in the biological context,
duplication-attachment models have appeared to be useful in modeling protein-protein in-
teraction networks. for example, ratmann et al. [245] proposed a mixture of preferential
attachment and duplication divergence with parent-child attachment model to assess evo-

46

lutionary dynamics of protein interaction networks of h. pylori and p. falciparum. they
proposed a likelihood-free mcmc-based routine to estimate posterior of network summary
statistics. a more general review of work in modeling dynamics (evolution) on the basis of
protein-protein interaction data is available in [246].

wiuf et al. [326] have developed a recursive construction of the likelihood for duplication-
attachment models, e   ectively enabling principled statistical data analysis, estimation and
id136.

4.4 continuous time markov chain models

the use of continuous markov processes to model dynamic networks was    rst proposed by
holland and leinhardt [148] and wasserman [312] and most recently studied by snijders
and colleagues [275; 276]. as shall become clear in this section, continuous markov process
models (cmpm) are intimately tied to the ergm models described in section 3.6. within
the cmpm family, network edges are taken to be binary (either absent or present, but
not weighted), and the evolution occurs one edge at a time. model variants arise due to
the many possible speci   cations of edge change id203. some exceptions to this general
approach include the party model of mayer [206], where multiple edges are allowed to change
at the same time, and the work of koskinen and snijders [179], which deals with bayesian
parameter id136 methods for the case where not all edge modi   cations are observed.
we begin by providing a quick reminder of continuous markov processes, borrowing
notation from [275]. de   ne {y (t) | t     t } to be a stochastic process, where y (t) has a    nite
outcome space y and t is a continuous time interval. suppose that a markov condition
holds: for any possible outcome   y     y and any pair of time points {ta < tb | ta, tb     t },

pr{y (tb) =   y | y (t) = y(t),   t : t     ta} = pr{y (tb) =   y|y (ta) = y(ta)}.

(4.1)

in other words, supposing that tb denotes the future and ta the present, then conditioning
on the past is equivalent to conditioning on the present when it comes to determining the
future. if the id203 in equation 4.1 depends only on tb     ta, then one can prove that
y (t) has a stationary transition distribution, and the transition matrix

pr{y (tb) =   y | y (ta) = y}(cid:105)
(cid:104)

pr(tb     ta) :=

can be written as a matrix exponential

pr(t) = etq,

y,  y   y

(4.2)

(4.3)

where q is known as the intensity matrix with elements q(y,   y). the elements q(y,   y) can be
thought of as the slope (rate of change) of the id203 of state change as a function of
time, i.e., pr{y (t +  ) =   y | y (t) = y}      q(y,   y). the diagonal elements q(y, y) are negative
and are de   ned so that the rows of q sum to zero.
when modeling a social network, the outcome space y is taken to be all possible edge
con   gurations of an n -node network, and an individual con   guration y     y is taken to be

47

a binary vector of length (cid:0)n

(cid:1). we use the shorthand qij(y) to denote the propensity for

the edge between node i and j to    ip into its opposite value under con   guration y. the
function qij(y) completely speci   es the dynamics of the network model. we now review
several variants of cmpm which di   er only in their de   nition of qij(y).

2

independent arc, reciprocity, and popularity models. the independent arc model
employs the simplest de   nition of qij(y):

independent arc model:

qij(y) =   yij ,

(4.4)

i.e., yij changes from 0 to 1 at a rate   0, and from 1 to 0 at rate   1.
in this model,
modi   cation to one edge does not depend on the setting of other edges. the model is simple
enough that the transition probabilities pr(t) can be derived in closed form (see, e.g., taylor
and carlin [292] p. 362-364). maximum likelihood parameter estimation for this model was
discussed in [278].

in the reciprocity model, the rate of change in yij depends only on the reciprocal edge

yji:

reciprocity model:

qij(y) =   yij +   yij yji.

(4.5)

thus, if no link currently exists between nodes i and j, then the propensity for adding
either directed edge is   0; if one directed edge exists, then the reciprocal edge is added with
propensity   0 +   0. if one directed edge exists, then it is deleted with rate   1. if both edges
exist, then the deletion propensity for either is   1 +   1. the transition matrix pr(t) can be
derived but has a complicated form [189; 272].

along the same line of development, the popularity model and the expansiveness model
[312; 313] de   ne the change rate for edge yij to be dependent on y+j, the in-degree of node
j, or yi+, the out-degree of node i:

popularity model:
expansiveness model:

qij(y) =   yij +   yij y+j,
qij(y) =   yij +   yij yi+.

(4.6)
(4.7)

edge-oriented dynamics. snijders [276] outlines two categories of transition dynamics:
edge-oriented and node-oriented.
in both cases, the intensity matrix is factored into two
components: one controls the opportunity for change, and the other speci   es the propensity
of change. more precisely, the continuous time markov process is now split into two sub-
processes; the    rst operating in the continuous time domain and dictating when a change
should occur; the second dealing with the id203 of the discrete event of individual
edge    ips. both edge-oriented and node-oriented dynamics can be interpreted as stochastic
optimizations of a potential function f (y) on the network con   guration. the di   erence is
that, in the edge-oriented case, f is based on global statistics of the network, whereas in the
node-oriented case, f is de   ned for each node   s local neighborhood. moreover, the choice of
which edge to    ip di   ers between the two formulations.

48

using y(i, j, z) to denote the con   guration where the edge eij has the value z     {0, 1},

edge-oriented dynamics can be written in the following general form:

qij(y) =   pij(y),

where

pij(y) =

exp(f (y(i, j, 1     yij)))

exp(f (y(i, j, 0))) + exp(f (y(i, j, 1)))

.

(4.8)

(4.9)

thus, in edge-oriented dynamics each edge follows an independent poisson process, so that
the time until the next event has an exponential distribution with parameter   . when an
event occurs for edge i     j, the edge    ips to its opposite value with id203 pij(y).

the potential function f (y) is usually de   ned as a linear combination of network statis-

tics:

f (y) =

  ksk(y).

(4.10)

(cid:88)

k

this should start to look familiar. indeed the cmpm process with edge-oriented dynamics
is equivalent to the id150 process for ergms (where the next edge to be updated
is selected randomly). the statistics sk(y) for node k take on the usual forms (see table 4.1).

number of directed arcs:

number of reciprocated arcs:

s1(y) =

s2(y) =

number of pairs of arcs with the same target:

s3(y) =

number of pairs of arcs with the same origin:

s4(y) =

number of paths of length two:

number of transitive triplets:

s5(y) =

s6(y) =

ij

ij

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

ijk

ijk

ijk

yij

yijyji

ykjyji

yikyij

yijyjk

yijyikyjk

table 4.1: the table of network statistics for a directed social network.

ijk

the statistics in table 4.1 assume directed graphs, however it is easy to come up with
the corresponding statistics for undirected graphs. for example, in the undirected case all

the edges are    reciprocal    and thus s1 and s2 are combined into s(cid:48)(y) =(cid:80)

i,j>i   n yij.

due to their close relations to ergms, edge-oriented models su   er the same fate of
degeneracy. for example, if the parameter    for transitive triplets is not too small, then
with high id203 the simulated network will be a complete graph. however, compared
to static networks, degeneracy in the longitudinal case is not as much a concern, as the
complete graph will only emerge at some distant time in the future.

49

(cid:88)

node-oriented dynamics. fully node-oriented dynamics [275] de   nes the intensity ma-
trix as

where

qij(y) =   ipij(y),
exp(fi(y(i, j, 1     yij)))
h(cid:54)=i exp(fi(y(i, h, 1     yih)))

(cid:80)

.

pij(y) =

(4.11)

(4.12)

thus the independent poisson processes for determining edge change opportunity are now
de   ned for each node (with intensity   i) as opposed to each edge. given the opportunity for
edge change, each node seeks to optimize its own potential function as de   ned by

fi(y) =

  ksik(y).

(4.13)

the function fi(y) is similar to the global potential f (y) in equation 4.10 but only aggregates
over the local neighborhood of node i. node i favors changing the incident edge that would
lead to the biggest increase in its potential.

k

edge-node mixed dynamics. snijders [276] also suggested a form of mixed dynamics
where the opportunity for change is edge-oriented, but the potential functions are node-
oriented:

qij(y) =   

(4.14)
thus the opportunity to modify each edge i     j follows independent poisson processes with
parameter   . but given the opportunity for change, the id203 of an actual    ip depends
on node i   s local network con   guration.

.

(cid:80)
exp(fi(y(i, j, 1     yij)))
h(cid:54)=i exp(fi(y(i, h, 1     yih)))

remark. parameter estimation in cpcm models has until recently been done via method
of moments, where the expected values are obtained through mcmc on simulated networks
[273]. koskinen and snijders [179] proposed a bayesian id136 method that allows for
computation of the posterior distribution of the parameters and treats missing values more
adequately. for details of the procedure, please refer to koskinen and snijders [179].

4.5 discrete time markov models

in this section, we outline three recent proposals of dynamic network models operating in
the discrete time domain (see also [22]). all three models have the markov property and
represent the likelihood as a sequence of factored conditional probabilities

pr(y 1, y 2, . . . , y t ) = pr(y t | y t   1) pr(y t   1 | y t   2)       pr(y 2 | y 1)),

(4.15)
where {y 1, . . . , y t} is a sequence of t observed snapshots of the network. banks and carley
[22] discussed the simplest version of such models. see also [253].

50

exp{(cid:88)

k

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

ij

4.5.1 discrete markov ergm model

hanneke and xing [139] proposed a natural extension of the ergm model in the discrete
markov domain. unlike the set up in the continuous domain, the potential function in this
model involve the statistics of two consecutive con   gurations of the network:

pr(yt | yt   1) =

1
z

  ksk(yt, yt   1)}.

(4.16)

table 4.2 lists a few examples of network statistics de   ned on pairs of network snapshots.

density of edges:

stability:

reciprocity:

transitivity:

s1(yt, yt   1) = 1
(n   1)
s2(yt, yt   1) = 1
(n   1)

s3(yt, yt   1) = n

s4(yt, yt   1) = n

yt
ij
ijyt   1
[yt
ij
jiyt   1
yt
ikyt   1
yt

(cid:46)(cid:88)
(cid:46)(cid:88)

ij yt   1

yt   1

ij

ij

ij

jk

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

ij

yt   1
ij yt   1

jk

ij + (1     yt

ij)(1     yt   1
ij )]

table 4.2: the table of network statistics for pairs of network snapshots.

ijk

ijk

the basic model may be extended to allow for multiple relations, node attributes, and

k-th order markov dependencies of the form

pr(y k+1, y k+2, . . . , y t | y 1, . . . , y k) =

pr(y t | y t   k, . . . , y t   1),

(4.17)

where

pr(y t | y t   k, . . . , y t   1) =

1
z

  ksk(y t, . . . , y t   k).

(4.18)

the joint distribution of the    rst k network snapshots may be represented by an ergm
for the    rst snapshot, and a (k     1)-th order discrete markov dependency model for yk. the
paired network statistics may be extended over k network sequences.

maximum likelihood parameter estimates may be computed via any numerical approxi-
mation technique such as the newton-raphson method. computation of the gradient and
hessian requires the mean and covariance of the sequence network statistics, which are ex-
actly computable for a pair of networks, but require id150 in the k-sequence case
[139]. the likelihood of this model is well behaved if the minimum su   cient statistics involve
only dyads, however, similar to its static counterpart, the full dynamic ergm is prone to
likelihood degeneracy.

51

t(cid:89)
exp{(cid:88)

t=k+1

k

4.5.2 dynamic latent space model

sarkar and moore [264] extended the static latent space model of ho    et al. [146] (cf. sec-
tion 3.9) in the time domain. recall that in the static latent space model, the log odds ratio
of a link between nodes i and j depends on the distance between their latent positions zi
and zj. the dynamic latent space model allows the latent positions to change over time in
gaussian-distributed random steps:

zt | zt   1     n (zt   1,   2i).

the observation model is a modi   ed version of the original latent space model1:

pl
ij := pl(yij = 1) =

1

1 + exp(dij     rij)

,

(4.19)

(4.20)

where dij is the euclidean distance between i and j in latent space, and rij is a radius
of in   uence de   ned as c    (max(  i,   j) + 1) (  i and   j being the degrees of node i and j,
respectively). the    radius of in   uence    is based on the assumption that the higher the
maximum degree of the two end nodes, the more likely the edge. this may be true in
id191 where proli   c authors are more likely to form new co-authorships. the
constant 1 is added to ensure that the radius is non-zero, and c is estimated from data by a
line-search (a minimization method in one dimension).

the link id203 pij is de   ned to be a mixture between the modi   ed latent space link
id203 pl
ij and a noise id203   . the idea is that pairs of nodes who are outside
of each other   s radius have only a low noise id203 of establishing a link, while nodes
within each other   s radii follow the id203 pl
ij:

the full observation model is then

pij =   (dij)pl

pr(y t | z t) =

ijk(dij) + (1       (dij))  .
(cid:89)

(cid:89)

(1     pij),

pij

i   j

i(cid:28)j

(4.21)

(4.22)

where i     j denotes the presence of an edge from i to j. the latent space positions z t are
estimated in sequence for t = 1 . . . t by maximizing the likelihood of the observed y t:

z t = argmaxz pr(y t | z) pr(z | z t   1).

(4.23)

the authors propose conjugate gradient optimization starting from an initial estimate of
the latent positions based on a multidimensional scaling (mds) transform of the observed
pairwise distances. to eliminate rotational ambiguity, a procrustean (rotationally invariant)
transform is applied to the mds transform so that z t is aligned with z t   1.

applying the model to the nips paper co-authorship dataset (cf. subsection 2.2.6), the
authors gave anecdotal evidence of the validity of the changing embeddings of several well

1note that in this dynamic version of the latent space model, links are assumed to be undirected.

52

known machine learning researchers over time. the dynamics of the researchers    latent
positions allowed for an insight into the evolution of the machine learning community.

sarkar et al. [265] also proposed a richer model based on [124], which improved upon
previous work in two ways. one of the di   erentiating features of this work was the ability to
simultaneously embed words and authors into the latent space, which allowed for representa-
tion of a two-mode network. the major advantage, however, was the id136 method   the
authors proposed a kalman-   lter like dynamic procedure, which allowed for estimation of
the posterior distributions over the positions of the authors in the latent space. proposed
procedure was applied to a simulated nips dataset.

the impact of this line of work is dichotomous:    rst, it o   ers an explanation of the
network at every time step, and second, it enables an accurate and e   cient prediction of the
state of the network at a time step in the future. the proposed id136 procedures made it
possible for network modeling to scale to large dynamic collections of data. the drawback of
this approach is the lack of an explicit mechanism that could explain the dynamics behind
the real networks.

another latent model for id191 was developed in the physics community.
leicht et al. [190] proposed to use latent variables to capture the grouping of papers that
have similar citation pro   les over time. the network in this case is a directed acyclic graph
and the nodes are papers rather than authors. using as example a set of opinions from the us
supreme court and their citations between the years of 1789 and 2007, the authors showed
how a simple latent model was able to recover, in a completely unsupervised manner, the
di   erent eras in us supreme court opinion references. the parameters of the model, except
for the number of latent classes, were estimated using an em algorithm. di   erent numbers
of latent classes were tested and each revealed something new about the underlying data.
the authors also compared the latent method to a id91 based on network modularity
[233]. even with the information about time (directionality in the graph) removed, the latent
variable model was still able to discover the same split between two groups of opinions that
happened around 1937. the network modularity id91 in a way validated the outcome
of the latent model.

in a separate experiment, leicht et al. [190] showed that deterministic approaches such
as    hubs and authorities    and eigenvector centrality [171] discovered interesting network
properties that were not revealed by the statistical models. the deterministic analyses
showed several signi   cant drops in the age of authorities sited, meaning that once in a while,
the younger set of opinions became the new authorities and that the process happened in
a    decisive    manner, rather than gradually.
in this way, deterministic network analysis
approaches complement statistical models.

4.5.3 dynamic contextual friendship model (dcfm)

the dynamic contextual friendship model (dcfm) of goldenberg and zheng [128] repre-
sents an attempt to capture several aspects of the complexity of the evolution of real social
networks over time. in a real-life friendship network, people may meet and interact with
each other under di   erent contexts (e.g., school, work projects, social outings, etc.), and the

53

strength of interpersonal relationships change over time based on these interactions. dcfm
o   ers such a mechanism for network evolution, where edges have weights that indicate the
strength of the relationship, and each node is given a distribution over social interaction
spheres (contexts). context is de   ned to be any activity where people may interact with
each other. at each given time step, each node chooses a random context according to the
node   s distribution over contexts. nodes that appear in the same context update the weights
of the links between them. the id203 of a weight increase (or decrease) depends on
whether the pair had a chance to meet (a coin toss in a model) and the    friendliness    pa-
rameter of the individuals involved. the possibility of both positive and negative weight
updates allows for edge birth and death over time. an extension of the model also allows
for addition and deletion of nodes.

the underlying dynamics is captured by a    rst-order markov chain model. letting w t
denote the weighted adjacency matrix at time t, the basic generative process at time t can
be formalized as follows:

1. for each node i, sample context ci     mult(  i), where   i denotes the context distribu-

tion parameters.

2. for each pair of nodes i and j in the same context, sample meeting variable mij    

bern(  i  j), where   i and   j represent the    friendliness    of nodes i and j;

3.

w t

ij =

poi(  h(w t   1
poi(  (cid:96)(w t   1

ij

ij + 1))

if mij = 1,

)) otherwise,

(cid:40)

where   h and   (cid:96) are hyperparameters indicating the rates of growth and decay, respec-
tively. the idea is that a meeting should increase the edge weight with high id203,
otherwise the weight decays.

the parameters   i,   i,   h,   (cid:96) all have conjugate priors and are estimated through gibbs sam-
pling [331].

the model can generate networks with a number of di   erent properties. for example,
figure 4.3 shows various degree distributions generated by dcfm, while figure 4.4 demon-
strates possible relation dynamics. pair (47, 45) shows a brief resuming of the relationship,
which dissolves again in the next moment. while dcfm is capable of emulating such long-
term memory of past relationships, it does so at the cost of added model complexity.

few datasets contain weighted relationships. the enron dataset (cf. subsection 2.2.2)
contains email exchanges that can be aggregated on a weekly basis to simulate strength of
relationships. in the nips dataset (cf. subsection 2.2.6), the number of joint publications
per year can represent the strength of the coauthorship. in these cases, the dcfm contexts
can be taken to be the topics of emails or articles, and the friendliness parameters can be
estimated using the method of moments.

one drawback of dcfm is its lack of identi   ability;

it is impossible to tell without
additional knowledge whether an individual formed many friendships because he frequently

54

figure 4.3: log-log plot of the degree distributions of a network with 200 people.   i is drawn
from beta(1, 3) for the plot on the left, and from beta(1, 8) for the right hand side. solid
lines represent a linear    t and dashed lines quadratic    t to the data. contexts are drawn
every 50-th timesteps.

figure 4.4: weight dynamics for 4 di   erent pairs in a dcfm simulated network of 600
people over 600 time steps. contexts switches occur every 50-th timestep and b = 3.

55

01002003004005006000300(11,33)time01002003004005006000300(52,49)time0100200300400500600010(47,45)time010020030040050060001500(52,53)changes contexts and is very friendly or because the contexts themselves tend to be large.
also, weighted network data are hard to come by and thus pseudo-weights often have to be
used.

the dcfm model is important in its own right: the life-mimicking, rich generative
mechanism is a step towards realistic complex models that ultimately can be used to explain
the intricacies of observed data, especially if additional information about contexts and
individuals    friendliness is available.

56

chapter 5

issues in network modeling

there are a number of major statistical modeling and inferential challenges in the analysis of
network data that go well beyond those described in previous sections of this article. these
relate to both the quality and the ease of statistical id136 and we mention a few of them
here:

network visualization. with the rise of online social networks and network modeling,
we have seen a proliferation of visualization tools, especially those based on variations of
constraint-based spring model algorithms, e.g., see the discussion and references in shnei-
derman and aris [267]. the automated algorithms often use node degrees or some form
of distance metric between nodes to arrange their placement. for example, sonia1 is a
popular package for visualizing dynamic or longitudinal network data; it can be used as a
platform for the development, testing, and comparison of various static and dynamic layout
techniques. however, little is known about how to e   ectively combine visualization with the
kinds of statistical models we review here, especially if one wants to use the visualization as
another tool in the analysis of network data.

computability. can we do statistical estimation computations and model    tting exactly
for large networks, e.g., by full mcmc methods for mixed membership and exponential
random graph models, or do we need to resort to approximations such as those involved in
the variational approximation employed by [8; 9]?

for ergm models a newly updated suite of programs and documentation is now avail-
able [138; 157; 224; 129]. the siena package2 developed by snijders and colleagues con-
tains a complementary suite of programs that are particularly useful for longitudinal network
analyses (though rinaldo et al. [251] speak words of caution). the packages are capable of
learning networks of size up to a few thousand nodes.

the truth is that it is unrealistic to expect that really large networks with millions of
nodes can be estimated using exact methods. even variational approximations, which have

1http://sonia.stanford.edu/
2http://stat.gamma.rug.nl/siena.html

57

their own drawbacks such as sensitivity to the starting point, are not realizable for networks
on a really large scale. the key to network modeling and parameter estimation is to take
into account the sparsity that comes with size. the methods that are good on small or
medium-sized but relatively dense networks, might be computationally infeasible or contain
invalid assumptions for larger networks. as we gear up to model very large networks, it is
important to focus not only on the disadvantages that size brings but also on its advantages.

asymptotics and assessing goodness of fit. there is no standard large sample
asymptotics for networks (e.g., as n goes to in   nity) that can be used to assess the goodness-
of-   t of models. thus we may have serious problems with variance estimates for parameters
and with con   dence or posterior interval estimates. while a few models with a small number
of    xed parameters have well-behaved asymptotics, the problems here tend to be the inherent
dependence of network data and the growth in the number of parameters to be estimated
as n increases. haberman [134] comments brie   y on asymptotics in his discussion of the
p1 model, and notes the similarity to issues for the rasch model from item response theory.
the lack of asymptotics means that we may have problems of consistency of estimators, but
it also means that there is no standard basis for model comparison and assessing goodness
of    t. most other authors have addressed these issues either empirically, e.g., hunter et al.
[156], or not at all.

there are two alternative approaches. we can consider assessing    t or comparing models
using exact distributions given the minimal su   cient statistics (msss). this works for
simple models but not obviously for the general class of ergms or most dynamic models in
the literature. further, for many of the models, especially those involving latent variables,
the msss are the data themselves. alternatively, we could think in terms of some form of
cross-validation for model selection and assessment. the problem with cross-validation is
the boundary e   ects associated with subsets of nodes. this is directly related to the problem
of sampling in networks.

bickel and chen [37] address the problem of asymptotics in the context of blockmodeling
or community discovery, and the methods they exploit may be useful in a broader context
when the number of parameters to be estimated grows as n increases.

sampling. do our data represent the entire network or are they based on only a subnet-
work or subgraph? when the data come from a subgraph, even one selected at random, we
need to worry about the e   ects at the boundary3 and the attendant biases they bring to
parameter estimates, cf. the negative result in stumpf et al. for scale-free models in which
they show the extent and nature of the bias [289]. most of the early results on sampling for
network data focused on random subgraphs and exploited the traditional statistical theory of
design-based sampling, in which the properties of the network are assumed to be    xed, and
we evaluate sample quantities by considering their distribution under all possible similarly

3the boundary is the collection of observed nodes which have links to the unobserved nodes. the
boundary can potentially include all observed nodes. only nodes for which the set of known links are certain
to be complete are not included in the boundary     the condition that is hard to satisfy in real world networks.

58

selected subgraphs. for details, see the many papers by ove frank [109; 295] and oth-
ers [125; 135; 258]. wiuf and stumpf [325] and stumpf and thorne [288] recently adopted
a related but di   erent approach focusing on properties such as degree distributions using
binomial random sample sizes from    large    graphs. others such as leskovec and faloutsos
[191] examine aspects of the question in an empirical but ad hoc fashion. the relevance
of sampling for model-based network id136 was    rst addressed by thompson and frank
[295], and further developed by handcock and gile [135], who adapt mcmc algorithms for
exponential random graph models to account for sampling designs. to date, these are the
only works to seriously explore this important topic. airoldi and carley [6] quantify the
sensitivity of alternative sampling algorithms to generate graphs that share similar topolog-
ical properties, as well as the divergence of topological properties of algorithms for sampling
popular network models.

we expect the issue of sampling to be of relevance to virtually all of the models and
we need to explore their consequences. this will be especially true when we try to update
model parameter estimates based on extracts of data in a dynamic fashion.

missing data. along with sampling arises a question of the treatment of missing data in
statistical networks. usually, the non-respondents to surveys are excluded from the analysis
and the modeling considers only individuals for which all data is available. a few works
deal with missing data directly. the empirical impact of nonrespondents in a survey to
analysis is considered in [284], the modeling implications and id136 for non-respondents
in ergm can be found in [255; 120; 178]. missing data in longitudinal studies is the subject
of [154]. this work makes assumptions about sampling strategies to justify the estimation
of missing edges using a missing at random assumption. because this is not in general a
correct assumption we have an interesting set of open problems. kossinets [180] considers
three missing data mechanisms: network boundary speci   cation (non-inclusion of actors or
a   liations), survey non-response, and censoring by vertex degree (   xed choice design), and
examines their e   ect on a study of a scienti   c collaboration network. one type of missing
data - links or relations - can be treated as a prediction task by treating links between
nodes in a given network as probabilistic quantities and using statistical models based on
the available data to estimate the likelihood of those edges being there. the problem of
prediction is often addressed in the machine learning community and we discuss it next.

prediction.
in our review of the literature on networks across many disciplines we have
found limited methodological work focussing on evaluating and comparing the predictive
ability of various models, static or dynamic. there are papers on link prediction in the
relational network model literature (e.g.
[238]). liben-nowell and kleinberg [198] develop
approaches to link prediction based on measures for analyzing the    proximity    of nodes
in a network, e.g., the www. in biological literature, a number of papers examine the
problem of predicting missing links in biological networks (e.g.
[327] is one of the earlier
works). however, these papers focus on how to cleverly combine heterogeneous data in
order to discover new links. the evaluation is usually limited to cross-validation on the

59

known links   information that is incomplete and available only for a few organisms.
in
the sociological literature on organizations, there is often interest in distinguishing among
organizations on the basis of their network structure, so there would clearly be interest in
utilizing methodology for prediction based on network structure. because making predictions
of various sorts from dynamic network models    ts well within the machine learning paradigm,
we expect to see many more papers on the topic in the not too distant future.

embeddability. underlying most dynamic network models is a continuous time stochastic
process even though the data used to study the models and their implications may come in
the form of repeated snapshots at discrete time points (epochs)   a form of time sampling as
opposed to node sampling referred to above   or cumulative network links. in such circum-
stances we need to take special care in how we represent and estimate the continuous-time
parameters in the actual data realizations used to    t models. this is known in the statistical
literature as the embeddability problem and was studied for markov processes in the 1970s
by singer and spilerman [270, 271] for social processes, and more recently by hansen and
scheinkman [140] in the context of econometric models and by others in the computational
   nance literature. wasserman [313] and various papers by snijders and his collaborators
illustrate how to address embedding in some simple dynamic models.

identi   ability.
identi   ability of model parameters is a technical issue in statistics that
refers to the fact that multiple solutions may exist (in the parametric space) that lead to
exactly the same likelihood. in this sense, no id136 procedure can distinguish between
these solutions. for instance, in a mixture model we can permute the assignments of points
to mixture components to obtain an equivalent solution. there are a number of papers
that describe the issue in various models (e.g., [283; 132]) and from di   erent perspectives
(e.g., [51; 52] from the algebraic perspective). a few solutions to address this issue have
been proposed recently. some consider id136 on equivalence classes in a blockmodel for
network data [236]. others pre-process the data to identify a reference solution that drives
the id136 [137].

combining links with their attributes.
in many network data sets, especially those
arising in machine learning contexts, there are attributes associated with the network links.
for example in e-mail and blog databases, the attributes may be taken to be the contents
of the messages or postings. there is an emerging literature focused on cascades of such
links but few papers are situated in a full network model setting and few authors attempt
to combine the models for links with models for message or posting texts. this is a natural
extension to models described here, especially the mixed membership stochastic blockmodels
of section 3.8, since the text could naturally be modeled by mixed-membership topic models.
mccallum et al. [208] and chang and blei [61] suggest di   erent ways to approach this kind
of combination model. dynamic models that combine evolving block and topic structures
would be of special interest for such applications.

60

chapter 6

summary

the ubiquity of networks in areas as diverse as the social sciences, biology, computer science,
physics, and economics, has spawned extensive literature on the subject.
in this review,
we discussed in detail a few main trends in the statistical network modeling literature,
focussing on models that have historically inspired many others as well as a few recent
proposals. by charting the evolution of statistical network modeling approaches, we pointed
out explicit connections between the discussed models. figure 6.1 provides a visual diagram
of model in   uence; an arrow pointing from a to b means either that the development of
model a in   uenced the subsequent development of model b, or that b can be viewed as a
generalization of a.

the literature on network modeling may be divided along di   erent lines of motivation.
models primarily introduced in the physics literature are motivated by asymptotic properties
of networks, whereas the literature id30 from statistics and statistical social science is
concerned with the id136 step in addition. thus, the main criticism of the random graph
models primarily developed in statistical physics is the lack of the assessment of the    t of
the models to the data. the main drawback in the statistical literature is the lack of the
comprehensive asymptotic analysis. though degeneracy found in the limiting case of the
earlier versions of the ergm has been addressed, a more broad analysis is still missing.

in this work we made a distinction between static and dynamic models. descriptive
models such as p1, p2, and ergm are clearly static as they infer a set of su   cient statistics
from a single snapshot of an existing network. the families of continuous and discrete time
markov models, on the other hand, are clearly dynamic as they seek to model multiple
snapshots of an evolving network. the erd  os-r  enyi-gilbert, preferential attachment, and
small-world models, while ultimately aim to model a single time point snapshot of a network,
are usually described via generative processes, where edges are added one at a time. these
models can thus be considered as either static, with respect to what they model, or dynamic,
with respect to how they   re represented. in this work we refer to them as pseudo-dynamic.
within the category of static models we discussed two main directions: models that take
networks as given (see section 3.4, section 3.5, and section 3.6) and models that assume
and estimate latent structures (section 3.8 and section 3.9). latent structure models have
to make certain assumptions about the data. stochastic blockmodels assume structural

61

figure 6.1: network summarizing the relations between models discussed in our review.
white nodes denote static models, yellow nodes        pseudo-dynamic    and green     dynamic
models. arrows indicate inspiration or in   uence of the model at the source on the model at
the target.

equivalence of the nodes, whereas latent space models assume the existence of an embedding
of the network in a low dimensional space. these models allow for better understanding of
the data in cases where it is believed to contain hidden structure.

we divided the category of dynamic models into continuous time markov models and dis-
crete time markov models. cmpm (section 4.4) assumes that the adjacency matrix evolves
according to a continuous markov chain whose intensity matrix can depend on various edge
and node dynamics. discrete time markov network models deal with a set of network snap-
shots observed at various time points. examples of discrete time markov network models
include dynamic extensions of ergm (subsection 4.5.1) and the latent space model (sub-
section 4.5.2), the duplication-attachment model, as well as a generative dynamic model for
friendship networks (subsection 4.5.3).

despite the many advances in network modeling over the last decade, there remains a
host of unresolved issues. we listed some of the issues in chapter 5. we feel that, from a

62

erd  s-r  nyi-gilbert random graph models(gilbert 1959, erd  s-r  nyi 1959)small-world studies (milgram 1967)exchangeable graph model (airoldi 2009)p1 models(holland and leinhardt 1981)p2 random effects model(van duijn, snijders, zijlstra, 2004, 2006)p* models / ergm(frank and strauss 1986)continuous time markov models(holland and leinhardt 1977, wasserman 1977, snijders 2005, 2006)latent space models(hoff, raftery, handcock 2002,handcock et al. 2007)mixed membership blockmodel(airoldi et al, 2008)discrete markov ergm(hanneke and xing 2006)dynamic latent space model(sarkar and moore 2005)dynamic contextual friendship model(zheng and goldenberg 2006)preferential attachment model (barab  si and albert 1999)small-world model (watts and strogatz 1998)duplication attachment model (kumar et al 2000, wiuf et al 2006)statistics or machine learning perspective, the biggest breakthroughs are to be made in the
areas of id136 and dynamic modeling. creating a model or perhaps    xing an existing
one in such a way that provides realistic generative and id136 mechanisms which can
identi   ably infer parameters of a large real world network would make a great contribution
to the statistical network modeling community.

63

64

acknowledgments

this research was partly supported by united states national institute of general medical
sciences center of excellence grant p50 gm071508, by national science foundation grants
dbi-0546275, iis-0513552, by national institutes of health grant r01 gm071966 to prince-
ton university, by national science foundation grant dms-0907009 to harvard university,
and by national science foundation grant dms-0631589 and partial support from u.s. army
research o   ce contract w911nfo910360 to the department of statistics, carnegie mellon
university. edoardo m. airoldi was a postdoctoral fellow in the department of computer
science and the lewis-sigler institute for integrative genomics at princeton university when
a large portion of this work was carried out. we thank three anonymous reviewers for their
valuable comments, as well as their helpful additions and corrections to our citation list.
we thank joseph blitzstein and pavel krivitsky for a careful reading and the correction of
a number of infelicities. we    nally wish to thank l  aszl  o barab  asi and z  oltan oltvai; pe-
ter bearman, james moody, and katherine stovel; james fowler and nicholas christakis;
purnamrita sarkar and andrew moore for giving permission to re-print    gures from their
original papers [27; 31; 65; 263].

65

66

bibliography

[1] e. m. airoldi. bayesian mixed membership models of complex and evolving networks.

phd thesis, school of computer science, carnegie mellon university, 2006.

[2] e. m. airoldi. model-based id91 for social networks: discussion. journal of the

royal statistical society, series a, 170(2):330   331, 2007.

[3] e. m. airoldi. getting started in probabilistic id114. plos computational

biology, 3(12):e252, 2007.

[4] e. m. airoldi. a family of distributions on the unit hypercube. technical report 2,

department of statistics, harvard university, 2009.

[5] e. m. airoldi. the exchangeable graph model. technical report 1, department of

statistics, harvard university, 2009.

[6] e. m. airoldi and k. m. carley. sampling algorithms for pure network topologies:
a study on the stability and the separability of metric embeddings. acm sigkdd
explorations, 7(2):13   22, 2005.

[7] e. m. airoldi, d. m. blei, e. p. xing, and s. e. fienberg. a latent mixed-membership
model for relational data. in proceedings of the 3rd international workshop on link
discovery: issues, approaches and applications (linkkdd    05), in conjunction with
the 11th international acm sigkdd conference, pages 82   89. acm press, new york,
2005.

[8] e. m. airoldi, d. m. blei, s. e. fienberg, and e. p. xing. mixed membership analysis of
high-throughput interaction studies: relational data. http://arxiv.org/abs/0706.
0294, 2007.

[9] e. m. airoldi, d. m. blei, s. e. fienberg, and e. p. xing. mixed membership stochastic

blockmodels. journal of machine learning research, 9:1981   2014, 2008.

[10] l. akoglu and c. faloutsos. rtg: a recursive realistic graph generator using random
typing. in data mining and knowledge discovery, 19(2):194   209, springer nether-
lands, 2009.

67

[11] r. d. alba. a graph-theoretic de   nition of a sociometric clique. journal of mathe-

matical sociology, 3:113   126, 1973.

[12] r. albert and a.-l. barab  asi. statistical mechanics of complex networks. reviews of

modern physics, 74(1):47   97, 2002.

[13] r. albert, h. jeong, and a.-l. barab  asi. diameter of the world wide web. nature,

401:130   131, 1999.

[14] d. l. alderson. catching the    network science    bug: insight and opportunity for the

operations researcher. operations research, 56(5):1047   1065, 2008.

[15] d. j. aldous. exchangeability and related topics. in lecture notes in mathematics,
volume 1117, pages 1   198. springer berlin / heidelberg, 1985. (also in ecole d   ete st
flour 1983).

[16] s. allesina, d. alonso, and m. pascual. a general model for food web structure.

science, 320(5876):658   661, 2008.

[17] u. alon. network motifs: theory and experimental approaches. nature reviews

genetics, 8:450   461, 2007.

[18] l. a. n. amaral, a. scala, m. barth  el  emy, and h. e. stanley. classes of small-world
networks. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 97(21):11149   11152, 2000.

[19] p. arabie, s. a. boorman, and p. r. levitt. constructing blockmodels: how and why.

journal of mathematical psychology, 17(1):21   63, 1978.

[20] l. backstrom, d. huttenlocher, j. kleinberg, and x. lan. group formation in large
social networks: membership, growth, and evolution. in proceedings of the 12th acm
sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages
44   54. acm press, new york, 2006.

[21] d. banks and k. m. carley. metric id136 for social networks. journal of classi   -

cation, 11(1):121   149, 1994.

[22] d. banks and k. m. carley. models for network evolution. journal of mathematical

sociology, 21:173   196, 1996.

[23] e. banks, e. nabieva, r. peterson, and m. singh. netgrep: fast network schema
searches in interactomes. genome biology, 9(9):r:138, 2008. http://genomebiology.
com/content/9/9/r138.

[24] a.-l. barab  asi. linked: the new science of networks. perseus, cambridge, ma,

2002.

[25] a.-l. barab  asi. the origin of bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics. nature, 435:

207   211, 2005.

68

[26] a.-l. barab  asi and r. albert. emergence of scaling in random networks. science, 286

(5439):509   512, 1999.

[27] a.-l. barab  asi and z. oltvai. network biology: understanding the cell   s functional

organization. nature reviews genetics, 5(2):101   113, 2004.

[28] a.-l. barab  asi, h. jeong, z. neda, e. ravasz, a. schubert, and t. vicsek. evolution

of the social network of scienti   c collaboration. physica a, 311(3   4):590   614, 2002.

[29] f. bassetti, m. cosentino lagomarsino, and s. mandra. exchangeable random net-

works. internet mathematics, 4(4):357   400, 2007.

[30] j. baumes, m. goldberg, m. magdon-ismail, and w. a. wallace. discovering hidden
groups in communication networks. in lecture notes in computer science, volume
3073, pages 378   389. springer berlin / heidelberg, 2004.

[31] p. s. bearman, j. moody, and k. stovel. chains of a   ection: the structure of ado-
lescent romantic and sexual networks. american journal of sociology, 110(1):44   91,
2004.

[32] a. bernard, d. s. vaughn, and a. j. hartemink. reconstructing the topology of protein
complexes. in t. speed and h. huang, editors, research in computational molecular
biology 2007 (recomb07), volume 4453 of lecture notes in bioinformatics, pages
32   46. springer berlin / heidelberg, 2007.

[33] j. besag. spatial interaction and the statistical analysis of lattice systems. journal of

the royal statistical society, series b, 36(2):192   236, 1974.

[34] i. bez  akov  a, a. kalai, and r. santhanam. graph model selection using maximum
likelihood. in proceedings of the 23rd international conference on machine learning,
volume 148 of acm international conference proceeding series, pages 105   112. acm
press, new york, 2006.

[35] s. bhamidi, g. bresler, and a. sly. mixing time of exponential random graphs. in
proceedings of the 49th annual ieee symposium on foundations of computer science,
pages 803   812. ieee computer society, washington, d.c., 2008.

[36] i. bhattacharya. collective entity resolution in relational data. phd thesis, univer-

sity of maryland, 2006.

[37] p. j. bickel and a. chen. a nonparametric view of network models and newman-
girvan and other modularities. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, (to
appear), 2009.

[38] c. m. bishop. neural networks for pattern recognition. oxford university press,

1995.

69

[39] y. m. m. bishop, s. e. fienberg, and p. w. holland. discrete multivariate analysis:
theory and practice. mit press, cambridge, ma, 1975. reprinted by springer-verlag,
2007.

[40] d. m. blei and s. e. fienberg. model-based id91 for social networks: discussion.

journal of the royal statistical society, series a, 170(2):332, 2007.

[41] d. m. blei, a. y. ng, and m. i. jordan. id44. journal of machine

learning research, 3:993   1022, 2003.

[42] j. blitzstein and p. diaconis. a sequential importance sampling algorithm for gener-
ating random graphs with prescribed degrees. technical report, stanford university,
2006.

[43] b. bollob  as. random graphs. cambridge university press, new york, 2nd edition,

2001.

[44] b. bollob  as and f. r. k. chung. the diameter of a cycle plus a random matching.

siam journal on discrete mathematics, 1(3):328   333, 1988.

[45] b. bollob  as, s. janson, and o. riordan. the phase transition in inhomogeneous

random graphs. random structures & algorithms, 31(1):3   122, 2007.

[46] e. bonabeau. agent-based modeling: methods and techniques for simulating human
systems. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 99(suppl. 3):7280   7287,
2002.

[47] d. botstein, s. a. chervitz, and j. m. cherry. yeast as a model organism. science,

277(5330):1259   1260, 1997.

[48] u. brandes and t. erlebach, editors. network analysis: methodological foundations,
volume 3418 of lecture notes in computer science. springer berlin /heidelberg, 2005.

[49] m. braun and j. mcauli   e. variational id136 for large-scale models of discrete

choice. http://arxiv.org/abs/0712.2526, 2007.

[50] m. buchanan. nexus: small worlds and the groundbreaking science of networks. w.

w. norton & company, new york, 2002.

[51] m.-l. g. buot and d. s. p. richards. counting and locating the solutions of polynomial
systems of maximum likelihood equations, i. journal of symbolic computation, 41(2):
234   244, 2006.

[52] m.-l. g. buot and d. s. p. richards. counting and locating the solutions of polynomial
systems of maximum likelihood equations, ii: the behrens-fisher problem. http:
//arxiv.org/abs/0709.0957, 2007.

70

[53] r. s. burt. models of network structure. annual review of sociology, 6:79   141, 1980.

[54] k. m. carley. group stability: a socio-cognitive approach. in e. lawler, b. markovsky,
c. ridgeway, and h. walker, editors, advances in group processes, pages 1   44. jai
press, greenwich, ct, 1990.

[55] k. m. carley. smart agents and organizations of the future.

in l. lievrouw and
s. livingstone, editors, the handbook of new media, pages 206   220. sage, thousand
oaks, ca, 2002.

[56] k. m. carley and a. newell. the nature of the social agent. journal of mathematical

sociology, 19(4):221   262, 1994.

[57] k. m. carley and j. reminga. ora: organizational risk analyzer. http://www.

casos.cs.cmu.edu/projects/ora/, 2004.

[58] k. m. carley and d. skillicorn. special issue on analyzing large scale networks: the
enron corpus. computational & mathematical organization theory, 11(3):179   181,
springer netherlands, 2005.

[59] k. m. carley, d. b. fridsma, e. casman, a. yahja, n. altman, l.-c. chen, b. kamin-
sky, and d. nave. biowar: scalable agent-based model of bioattacks. ieee transac-
tions on systems, man, and cybernetics, part a: systems and humans, 36(2):252   265,
2006.

[60] d. chakrabarti, y. zhan, and c. faloutsos. r-mat: a recursive model for graph
mining. in proceedings of the 4th siam international conference on data mining,
2004.

[61] j. chang and d. m. blei. relational topic models for document networks. in pro-
ceedings of the 12th international conference on arti   cal intelligence and statistics
(aistats    09), 2009.

[62] h. chen, e. reid, j. sinai, a. silke, and b. ganor, editors. terrorism informatics:
knowledge management and data mining for homeland security. springer-verlag,
new york, 2008.

[63] q. chen, h. chang, r. govindan, s. jamin, s. j. shenker, and w. willinger. the
origin of power laws in internet topologies revisited. in proceedings of the 21st annual
joint conference of the ieee computer and communication societies, 2:608   617,
2002.

[64] j. m. cherry, c. ball, s. weng, g. juvik, r. schmidt, c. adler, b. dunn, s. dwight,
l. riles, r. k. mortimer, and d. botstein. genetic and physical maps of saccharomyces
cerevisiae. nature, 387(6632 suppl.):67   73, 1997.

71

[65] n. a. christakis and j. h. fowler. the spread of obesity in a large social network over

32 years. new england journal of medicine, 357(370-379), 2007.

[66] n. a. christakis and j. h. fowler. the collective dynamics of smoking in a large social

network. new england journal of medicine, 358:2249   2258, 2008.

[67] n. a. christakis and j. h. fowler. dynamic spread of happiness in a large social
network: longitudinal analysis over 20 years in the framingham heart study. british
medical journal, 337:a2338, 2008.

[68] n. a. christakis and j. h. fowler. connected: the surprising power of our social

networks and how they shape our lives. little, brown and co., new york, 2009.

[69] f. chung and l. lu. complex graphs and networks. american mathematical society,

providence, ri, 2006.

[70] f. chung, l. lu, and v. vu. the spectra of random graphs with given expected

degrees. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 100(11):6313   6318, 2003.

[71] a. clauset. finding local community structure in networks. physical review e, 72(2):

026132, 2005.

[72] a. clauset and c. moore. how do networks become navigable? http://arxiv.org/

abs/cond-mat/0309415, 2003.

[73] a. clauset, c. moore, and m. e. j. newman. hierarchical structure and the prediction

of missing links in networks. nature, 453:98   101, 2008.

[74] a. clauset, c. r. shalizi, and m. e. j. newman. power-law distributions in empirical

data. siam review, 51(4):661   703, 2009.

[75] r. clegg, r. landa, u. harder, and m. rio. evaluating and optimising models of

network growth. http://arxiv.org/abs/0904.0785, 2009.

[76] p. cli   ord. markov random    elds in statistics. in g. r. grimmett and d. j. a. welsh,
editors, disorder in physical systems: a volume in honour of john m. hammersley,
pages 19   32. oxford university press, 1990.

[77] e. cohen-cole and j. m. fletcher. is obesity contagious? social networks vs. environ-
mental factors in the obesity epidemic. journal of health economics, 27:1382   1387,
2008.

[78] e. cohen-cole and j. m. fletcher. detecting implausible social network e   ects in
acne, height, and headaches: longitudinal analysis. british medical journal, 337:
a2533, 2008.

72

[79] j. copic, m. o. jackson, and a. kirman.

identifying community structures from
network data via maximum likelihood methods. the b.e. journal of theoretical eco-
nomics, 9(1), 2009.

[80] a. davis, b. b. gardner, m. r. gardner, and j. j. wallach. deep south: a social
anthropological study of caste and class. university of chicago press, 1941. reprinted
by university of south carolina press, 2009.

[81] g. b. davis and k. m. carley. clearing the fog: fuzzy, overlapping groups for social

networks. social networks, 30(3):201   212, 2008.

[82] b. de finetti. theory of id203, vol. 1-2. john wiley & sons, new york, 1990.

reprint of the 1974   1975 translation.

[83] d. j. de solla price. networks of scienti   c papers: the pattern of bibliographic refer-
ences indicates the nature of the scienti   c research front. science, 149(3683):510   515,
1965.

[84] p. diaconis and s. janson. graph limits and exchangeable random graphs. technical

report, department of statistics, stanford university, 2008.

[85] p. diaconis and b. sturmfels. algebraic algorithms for sampling from conditional

distributions. annals of statistics, 26(1):363   397, 1998.

[86] p. s. dodds, r. muhamad, and d. j. watts. an experimental study of search in global

social networks. science, 301(5634):827   829, 2003.

[87] p. domingos. mining social networks for viral marketing. ieee intelligent systems,

20(1):80   82, 2005.

[88] p. doreian, v. batagelj, and a. ferligoj. generalized blockmodeling of two-mode

network data. social networks, 26:29   53, 2004.

[89] p. doreian, v. batagelj, and a. ferligoj. generalized blockmodeling (structural anal-

ysis in the social sciences). cambridge university press, 2004.

[90] s. n. dorogovtsev and j. f. f. mendes. scaling behavior of developing and decaying

networks. europhysics letters, 52(1):33, 2000.

[91] r. durrett. random graph dynamics. cambridge university press, 2006.

[92] n. eagle, a. pentland, and d. lazer. inferring friendship network structure by using
mobile phone data. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 106(36):15274   
15278, 2009.

[93] p. erd  os and a. r  enyi. on random graphs, i. publicationes mathematicae, 6:290   297,

1959.

73

[94] p. erd  os and a. r  enyi. the evolution of random graphs. magyar tud. akad. mat.

kutat  o int. k  ozl., 5:17   61, 1960.

[95] e. a. erosheva, s. e. fienberg, and j. la   erty. mixed-membership models of scienti   c
publications. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 101(suppl. 1):5220   
5227, 2004.

[96] e. even-dar and m. kearns. a small world threshold for economic network formation.
in b. sch  olkopf, j. platt, and t. ho   man, editors, advances in neural information
processing systems (nips), volume 19, pages 385   392. mit press, cambridge, ma,
2007.

[97] m. faloutsos, p. faloutsos, and c. faloutsos. on power-law relationships of the inter-
net topology. in proceedings of the conference on applications, technologies, architec-
tures, and protocols for computer communication (sigcomm    99), pages 251   261.
acm press, new york, 1999.

[98] s. fields and o. song. a novel genetic system to detect protein-protein interactions.

nature, 340(6230):245   246, 1989.

[99] s. e. fienberg. analysis of cross-classi   ed categorical data. mit press, cambridge,

ma, 2nd edition, 1980. reprinted by springer-verlag, 2007.

[100] s. e. fienberg and s. k. lee. on small world statistics. psychometrika, 40(2):219   228,

1975.

[101] s. e. fienberg and s. s. wasserman. categorical data analysis of single sociometric

relations. sociological methodology, pages 156   192, 1981.

[102] s. e. fienberg and s. s. wasserman. an exponential family of id203 distributions
for directed graphs: comment. journal of the american statistical association, 76
(373):54   57, 1981.

[103] s. e. fienberg, m. m. meyer, and s. s. wasserman. statistical analysis of multiple
sociometric relations. journal of the american statistical association, 80:51   67, 1985.

[104] s. e. fienberg, s. petrovi  c, and a. rinaldo. algebraic statistics for p1 random graph
models: markov bases and their uses. in s. sinharay and n. j. dorans, editors, papers
in honor of paul w. holland. educational testing service, 2009.

[105] j. flannick, a. novak, b. s. srinivasan, h. h. mcadams, and s. batzoglou. gr  mlin:
general and robust alignment of multiple large interaction networks. genome research,
16(9):1169   1181, 2006.

[106] a. d. flaxman, a. m. frieze, and j. vera. a geometric preferential attachment model

of networks. internet mathematics, 3(2):187   206, 2006.

74

[107] a. d. flaxman, a. m. frieze, and j. vera. a geometric preferential attachment model

of networks ii. internet mathematics, 4(1):87   112, 2007.

[108] j. fowler and n. christakis. estimating peer e   ects on health in social networks.

journal of health economics, 27(5):1400   1405, 2008.

[109] o. frank. network sampling and model    tting. in p. j. carrington, j. scott, and s. s.
wasserman, editors, models and methods in social network analysis, pages 31   56.
cambridge university press, 2005.

[110] o. frank and d. strauss. markov graphs. journal of the american statistical associ-

ation, 81(395):832   842, 1986.

[111] n. friedman. inferring cellular networks using probabilistic id114. science,

303(5659):799   805, 2004.

[112] n. friedman, l. getoor, d. koller, and a. pfe   er. learning probabilistic relational
models. in proceedings of the 16th international joint conference on arti   cial intel-
ligence (ijcai-99), pages 1300   1309, 1999.

[113] m. t. gastner and m. e. j. newman. shape and e   ciency in spatial distribution
networks. journal of statistical mechanics: theory and experiment, 1:p01015, 2006.

[114] a.-c. gavin, m. b  osche, r. krause, p. grandi, m. marzioch, a. bauer, j. schultz,
j. m. rick, a.-m. michon, c.-m. cruciat, m. remor, c. h  ofert, m. schelder, m. bra-
jenovic, h. ru   ner, a. merino, k. klein, m. hudak, d. dickson, t. rudi, v. gnau,
a. bauch, s. bastuck, b. huhse, c. leutwein, m.-a. heurtier, r. r. copley, a. edel-
mann, e. querfurth, v. rybin, g. drewes, m. raida, t. bouwmeester, p. bork,
b. seraphin, b. kuster, g. neubauer, and g. superti-furga. functional organiza-
tion of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes. nature, 415:
141   147, 2002.

[115] a.-c. gavin, p. aloy, p. grandi, r. krause, m. boesche, m. marzioch, c. rau, l. j.
jensen, s. bastuck, b. d  umpelfeld, a. edelmann, m.-a. heurtier, v. ho   man, c. hoe-
fert, k. klein, m. hudak, a.-m. michon, m. schelder, m. schirle, m. remor, t. rudi,
s. hooper, a. bauer, t. bouwmeester, g. casari, g. drewes, g. neubauer, j. m.
rick, b. kuster, p. bork, r. b. russell, and g. superti-furga. proteome survey
reveals modularity of the yeast cell machinery. nature, 440(7084):631   636, 2006.

[116] l. getoor and b. taskar, editors. introduction to statistical relational learning. mit

press, cambridge, ma, 2007.

[117] l. getoor, n. friedman, d. koller, and b. taskar. learning probabilistic models of

link structure. journal of machine learning research, 3:679   707, 2003.

75

[118] c. j. geyer and e. a. thompson. constrained monte carlo maximum likelihood for
dependent data (with discussion). journal of the royal statistical society, series b,
54:657   699, 1992.

[119] e. n. gilbert. random graphs. annals of mathematical statistics, 30(4):1141   1144,

1959.

[120] k. j. gile and m. s. handcock. model-based assessment of the impact of missing data

on id136 for networks. csss working paper no. 66, 2006.

[121] p. s. gill and t. b. swartz. bayesian analysis of directed graphs data with application

to social networks. applied statistics, 53(2):249   260, 2004.

[122] m. girvan and m. e. j. newman. community structure in social and biological net-

works. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 99(12):7821   7826, 2002.

[123] k. s. gleditsch. expanded trade and gdp data. journal of con   ict resolution, 46

(5):712   724, 2002.

[124] a. globerson, g. chechik, f. pereira, and n. tishby. euclidean embedding of co-

occurrence data. journal of machine learning research, 8:2265   2295, 2007.

[125] s. goel and m. j. salganik. respondent-driven sampling as id115.

statistics in medicine, 28(17):2202   2229, 2009.

[126] a. goldenberg and a. moore. tractable learning of large bayes net structures from
sparse data. in proceedings of the 21st international conference on machine learning,
page 44. acm press, new york, 2004.

[127] a. goldenberg and a. moore. bayes net graphs to understand coauthorship networks.

in kdd workshop on link discovery: issues, approaches and applications, 2005.

[128] a. goldenberg and a. zheng. exploratory study of a new model for evolving net-
works. in e. m. airoldi, d. m. blei, s. e. fienberg, a. goldenberg, e. p. xing, and
a. x. zheng, editors, statistical network analysis: models, issues and new directions,
volume 4503 in lecture notes in computer science. springer berlin / heidelberg, 2007.

[129] s. m. goodreau, m. s. handcock, d. r. hunter, c. t. butts, and m. morris. a statnet

tutorial. journal of statistical software, 24(9):1   26, 2008.

[130] s. m. goodreau, j. a. kitts, and m. morris. birds of a feather, or friend of a friend?
using exponential random graph models to investigate adolescent social networks.
demography, 46(1):103   125, 2009.

[131] s. goyal. connections: an introduction to the economics of networks. princeton

university press, 2007.

76

[132] b. gr  un and f. leisch. dealing with label switching in mixture models under genuine

multimodality. journal of multivariate analysis, 100(5):851   861, 2008.

[133] a. guetz and p. constantine. lecture notes for course on information networks, 2007.

http://www.stanford.edu/class/msande337/notes/lec1.pdf.

[134] s. j. haberman. an exponential family of id203 distributions for directed graphs:

comment. journal of the american statistical association, 76(373):60   61, 1981.

[135] m. s. handcock and k. j. gile. modeling networks from sampled data. annals of

applied statistics, 4(1), 2010.

[136] m. s. handcock, g. l. robins, t. a. b. snijders, j. moody, and j. besag. assessing
degeneracy in statistical models of social networks. journal of the american statistical
association, 76:33   50, 2003.

[137] m. s. handcock, a. e. raftery, and j. tantrum. model-based id91 for social
networks (with discussion). journal of the royal statistical society, series a, 170:
301   354, 2007.

[138] m. s. handcock, d. r. hunter, c. t. butts, s. m. goodreau, and m. morris. statnet:
software tools for the representation, visualization, analysis and simulation of network
data. journal of statistical software, 24(1):12   25, 2008.

[139] s. hanneke and e. p. xing. discrete temporal models of social networks. in e. m.
airoldi, d. m. blei, s. e. fienberg, a. goldenberg, e. p. xing, and a. x. zheng,
editors, statistical network analysis: models, issues and new directions, volume 4503
of lecture notes in computer science. springer berlin / heidelberg, 2007.

[140] l. p. hansen and j. a. scheinkman. back to the future: generating moment implica-

tions for continuous-time markov processes. econometrica, 63(4):767   804, 1995.

[141] k. m. harris, f. florey, j. tabor, p. s. bearman, j. jones, and r. j. udry. the
national longitudinal study of adolescent health: research design. technical report,
carolina population center, university of north carolina, chapel hill, 2003.

[142] s. hill, f. provost, and c. volinsky. network-based marketing:

identifying likely

adopters via consumer networks. statistical science, 21(2):256   276, 2006.

[143] y. ho, a. gruhler, a. heilbut, g. d. bader, l. moore, s.-l. adams, a. millar,
p. taylor, k. bennett, k. boutilier, l. yang, c. wolting, i. donaldson, s. schandor   ,
j. shewnarane, m. vo, j. taggart, m. goudreault, b. muskat, c. alfarano, d. dewar,
z. lin, k. michalickova, a. r. willems, h. sassi, p. a. nielsen, k. j. rasmussen, j. r.
andersen, l. e. johansen, l. h. hansen, h. jespersen, a. podtelejnikov, e. nielsen,
j. crawford, v. poulsen, b. d. s  rensen, j. matthiesen, r. c. hendrickson, f. glee-
son, t. pawson, m. f. moran, d. durocher, m. mann, c. w. v. hogue, d. figeys, and

77

m. tyers. systematic identi   cation of protein complexes in saccharomyces cerevisiae
by mass spectrometry. nature, 415:180   183, 2002.

[144] p. d. ho   . random e   ects models for network data. in r. breiger, k. m. carley, and
p. e. pattison, editors, dynamic social network modeling and analysis: workshop
summary and papers, pages 303   312. the national academies press, washington,
d.c., 2003.

[145] p. d. ho   . modeling homophily and stochastic equivalence in symmetric relational
data. in j. c. platt, d. koller, y. singer, and s. roweis, editors, advances in neural
information processing systems (nips), volume 20, pages 657   664. mit press, 2008.

[146] p. d. ho   , a. e. raftery, and m. s. handcock. latent space approaches to social
network analysis. journal of the american statistical association, 97(460):1090   1098,
2002.

[147] p. w. holland and s. leinhardt. local structure in social networks. sociological

methodology, 7:1   45, 1976.

[148] p. w. holland and s. leinhardt. a dynamic model for social networks. journal of

mathematical sociology, 5(1):5   20, 1977.

[149] p. w. holland and s. leinhardt. an exponential family of id203 distributions
for directed graphs (with discussion). journal of the american statistical association,
76(373):33   65, 1981.

[150] p. w. holland, k. b. laskey, and s. leinhardt. stochastic blockmodels: first steps.

social networks, 5(2):109   137, 1983.

[151] p. holme, j. karlin, and s. forrest. an integrated model of tra   c, geography and
economy in the internet. acm sigcomm computer communication review, 38(3):
7   15, 2008.

[152] b. a. huberman and l. a. adamic. growth dynamics of the world-wide web. nature,

401:131, 1999.

[153] s. huh and s. e. fienberg. temporally-evolving mixed membership stochastic block-
models: exploring the enron e-mail database. in proceedings of the nips workshop
on analyzing graphs: theory & applications, whistler, british columbia, 2008.

[154] m. huisman and c. steglich. treatment of non-response in longitudinal network stud-

ies. social networks, 30(4):297   308, 2008.

[155] d. r. hunter and m. s. handcock. id136 in curved exponential family models for

networks. journal of computational and graphical statistics, 15(3):565   583, 2006.

78

[156] d. r. hunter, s. m. goodreau, and m. s. handcock. goodness of    t of social network

models. journal of the american statistical association, 103(481):248   258, 2008.

[157] d. r. hunter, m. s. handcock, c. t. butts, s. m. goodreau, and m. morris. ergm: a
package to    t, simulate and diagnose exponential-family models for networks. journal
of statistical software, 24(3), 2008. http://www.jstatsoft.org/v24/i03/paper.

[158] m. huss and p. holme. currency and commodity metabolites: their identi   cation
and relation to the modularity of metabolic networks. iet systems biology, 1:280   
285, 2007.

[159] t. ito, k. tashiro, s. muta, r. ozawa, t. chiba, m. nishizawa, k. yamamoto,
s. kuhara, and y. sakaki. toward a protein-protein interaction map of the bud-
ding yeast: a comprehensive system to examine two-hybrid interactions in all possible
combinations between the yeast proteins. proceedings of the national academy of
sciences, 97(3):1143   1147, 2000.

[160] m. o. jackson. social and economic networks. princeton university press, 2008.

[161] s. janson, t. luczak, and a. ruci  nski. random graphs. john wiley & sons, new

york, 2000.

[162] l. j. jensen and p. bork. biochemistry: not comparable, but complementary. science,

322(5898):56   57, 2008.

[163] j. h. jones and m. s. handcock. social networks (communication arising): sexual

contacts and epidemic thresholds. nature, 423:605   606, 2003.

[164] j. h. jones and m. s. handcock. an assessment of preferential attachment as a
mechanism for human sexual network formation. in proceedings of the royal society,
series b, volume 270, number 1520, pages 1123   1128, 2003.

[165] o. kallenberg. probabilistic symmetries and invariance principles. in id203 and

its applications. springer, new york, 2005.

[166] l. katz. the distribution of the number of isolates in a social group. annals of

mathematical statistics, 23(2):271   276, 1952.

[167] l. katz and j. h. powell. id203 distributions of random variables associated with
a structure of the sample space of sociometric investigations. annals of mathematical
statistics, 28(2):442   448, 1957.

[168] l. katz and t. r. wilson. the variance of the number of mutual choices in sociometry.

psychometrika, 21(3):299   304, 1956.

[169] m. kearns, s. suri, and n. montfort. an experimental study of the coloring problem

on human subject networks. science, 313(5788):824   827, 2006.

79

[170] d. kempe, j. kleinberg, and e. tardos.

in   uential nodes in a di   usion model for
social networks. in automata, languages and programming, volume 3580 of lecture
notes in computer science, pages 1127   1138. springer berlin / heidelberg, 2005.

[171] j. m. kleinberg. authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. journal of the

acm (jacm), 46(5):604   632, 1999.

[172] j. m. kleinberg. navigation in a small world   it is easier to    nd short chains between

points in some networks than others. nature, 406:845, 2000.

[173] j. m. kleinberg. the small-world phenomenon: an algorithmic perspective. in pro-
ceedings of the 32nd acm symposium on theory of computing, pages 163   170. acm
press, new york, 2000.

[174] j. m. kleinberg. small-world phenomena and the dynamics of information. in advances
in neural information processing systems (nips), volume 14. mit press, cambridge,
ma, 2001.

[175] j. m. kleinberg, s. r. kumar, p. raghavan, s. rajagopalan, and a. s. tomkins. the
web as a graph: measurements, models and methods. in computing and combina-
torics, volume 1627 of lecture notes in computer science, pages 1   17. springer berlin
/ heidelberg, 1999.

[176] a. s. klovdahl, j. j. potterat, d. e. woodhouse, j. b. muth, s. q. muth, and w. w.
darrow. social networks and infectious disease: the colorado springs study. social
science & medicine, 38(1):79   88, 1994.

[177] e. d. kolacyzk. statistical anaysis of network models. springer, new york, 2009.

[178] j. koskinen, g. l. robins, and p. e. pattison. analysing exponential random graph
(p-star) models with missing data using bayesian data augmentation. technical report,
department of psychology, school of behavioural science, university of melbourne,
austrailia, 2008.

[179] j. h. koskinen and t. a. b. snijders. bayesian id136 for dynamic social network

data. journal of statistical planning and id136, 137(12):3930   3938, 2007.

[180] g. kossinets. e   ects of missing data in social networks. social networks, 28(3):247   

268, 2006.

[181] d. krackhardt. the ties that torture: simmelian tie analysis in organizations. research

in the sociology of organizations, 16:183   210, 1999.

[182] v. e. krebs. mapping networks of terrorist cells. connections, 24(3):43   52, 2002.

[183] p. n. krivitsky, m. s. handcock, a. e. raftery, and p. d. ho   . representing degree
distributions, id91, and homophily in social networks with latent cluster random
e   ects models. social networks, 31(3):204   213, 2009.

80

[184] n. j. krogan, g. cagney, h. yu, g. zhong, x. guo, a. ignatchenko, j. li, s. pu,
n. datta, a. p. tikuisis, t. punna, j. m. peregr    n-alvarez, m. shales, x. zhang,
m. davey, m. d. robinson, a. paccanaro, j. e. bray, a. sheung, b. beattie, d. p.
richards, v. canadien, a. lalev, f. mena, p. wong, a. starostine, m. m. canete,
j. vlasblom, s. wu, c. orsi, s. r. collins, s. chandran, r. haw, j. j. rilstone,
k. gandi, n. j. thompson, g. musso, p. st onge, s. ghanny, m. h. lam, g. butland,
a. m. altaf-ul, s. kanaya, a. shilatifard, e. o   shea, j. s. weissman, c. j. ingles,
t. r. hughes, j. parkinson, m. gerstein, s. j. wodak, a. emili, and j. f. greenblatt.
global landscape of protein complexes in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae. nature,
440(7084):637   643, 2006.

[185] r. kumar, p. raghavan, s. rajagopalan, d. sivakumar, a. tomkins, and e. upfal.
stochastic models for the web graph. in proceedings of the 41st annual symposium
on foundations of computer science, pages 57   65, 2000.

[186] s. l. lauritzen. rasch models with exchangeable rows and columns. in j. m. bernardo

et al., bayesian statistics 7, pages 215   232. oxford university press, 2003.

[187] s. l. lauritzen. exchangeable rasch matrices. rendiconti di matematica, serie vii,

28(1):83   95, 2008.

[188] s. lee and c. f. stevens. general design principle for scalable neural circuits in a
vertebrate retina. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 104(31):12931   
12935, 2007.

[189] r. t. a. j. leenders. models for network dynamics: a markovian framework. journal

of mathematical sociology, 20:1   21, 1995.

[190] e. a. leicht, g. clarkson, k. shedden, and m. newman. large-scale structure of time

evolving id191. european physics journal b, 59(1):75   83, 2007.

[191] j. leskovec and c. faloutsos. sampling from large graphs. in proceedings of the 12th
acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining,
pages 631   636. acm press, new york, 2006.

[192] j. leskovec, d. chakrabarti, j. kleinberg, and c. faloutsos. realistic, mathematically
tractable graph generation and evolution, using kronecker multiplication. in knowl-
edge discovery in databases: pkdd 2005, volume 3721 of lecture notes in computer
science, pages 133   145. springer berlin / heidelberg, 2005.

[193] j. leskovec, j. kleinberg, and c. faloutsos. graphs over time: densi   cation laws,
shrinking diameters and possible explanations.
in proceedings of the 11th acm
sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages
177   187. acm press, new york, 2005.

81

[194] j. leskovec, j. kleinberg, and c. faloutsos. graph evolution: densi   cation and shrink-
ing diameters. acm transactions on knowledge discovery from data (tkdd), 1(1):
2, 2007.

[195] j. leskovec, d. chakrabarti, j. kleinberg, c. faloutsos, and z. ghahramani. kronecker
graphs: an approach to modeling networks. http://arxiv.org/abs/0812.4905v2,
2009.

[196] l. li, d. alderson, j. c. doyle, and w. willinger. towards a theory of scale-free
graphs: de   nition, proper ties, and implications. internet mathematics, 2(4):431   523,
2005.

[197] w. li and a. mccallum. pachinko allocation: dag-structured mixture models of
topic correlations.
in proceedings of the 23rd international conference on machine
learning, volume 148 of acm international conference proceeding series, pages 577   
584. acm press, new york, 2006.

[198] d. liben-nowell and j. kleinberg. the link prediction problem for social networks.
in proceedings of the 12th international conference on information and knowledge
management (cikm    03), pages 556   559. acm press, new york, 2003.

[199] f. lorrain and h. c. white. structural equivalence of individuals in social networks.

journal of mathematical sociology, 1:49   80, 1971.

[200] r. d. luce. connectivity and generalized cliques in sociometric group structure. psy-

chometrika, 15(2):169   190, 1950.

[201] r. d. luce. networks satisfying minimality conditions. american journal of mathe-

matics, 75(4):825   838, 1953.

[202] r. d. luce and a. d. perry. a method of matrix analysis of group structure. psy-

chometrika, 14(2):95   116, 1949.

[203] r. d. luce, j. macy, jr., and r. tagiuri. a statistical model for relational analysis.

psychometrika, 20(4):319   327, 1955.

[204] g. s. mann, d. mimno, and a. mccallum. bibliometric impact measures leveraging
topic analysis. in proceedings of the 6th acm/ieee-cs joint conference on digial
libraries, pages 65   74. acm press, new york, 2006.

[205] j.-m. marin, k. mengersen, and c. p. robert. bayesian modelling and id136 on
mixtures of distributions. in d. dey and c. r. rao, editors, handbook of statistics 25,
pages 15840   15845. elsevier sciences, 2005.

[206] t. f. mayer. parties and networks: stochastic models for relationship networks. jour-

nal of mathematical sociology, 10:51   103, 1984.

82

[207] a. mccallum, a. corradda-emmanuel, and x. wang. topic and role discovery in
in proceedings of the international joint conference on arti   cial

social networks.
intelligence, pages 786   791, 2005.

[208] a. mccallum, x. wang, and n. mohanty. joint group and topic discovery from re-
lations and text. in e. m. airoldi, d. m. blei, s. e. fienberg, a. goldenberg, e. p.
xing, and a. zheng, editors, statistical network analysis: models, issues and new
directions, volume 4503 of lecture notes in computer science, pages 28   44. springer
berlin / heidelberg, 2007.

[209] k. mccomb, c. moss, s. m. durant, l. baker, and s. sayialel. matriarchs as reposi-

tories of social knowledge in african elephants. science, 292(5516):491   494, 2001.

[210] p. mccullagh and j. a. nelder. generalized linear models. chapman & hall/crc,

2nd edition, 1989.

[211] j. w. mcdonald, p. w. f. smith, and j. j. forster. id115 exact

id136 for social networks. social networks, 29(1):127   136, 2007.

[212] m. mcglohon, l. akoglu, and c. faloutsos. weighted graphs and disconnected compo-
nents: patterns and a generator. in proceedings of the 14th international conference
on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 524   532. acm press, new york,
2008.

[213] m. m. meyer. transforming contingency tables. annals of statistics, 10(4):1172   1181,

1982.

[214] m. middendorf, e. ziv, and c. h. wiggins.

inferring network mechanisms: the
drosophila melanogaster protein interaction network. proceedings of the national
academy of sciences, 102(9):3192   3197, 2005.

[215] s. milgram. the small world problem. psychology today, 1(1):60   67, 1967.

[216] d. mimno and a. mccallum. mining a digital library for in   uential authors.

in
proceedings of the 7th acm/ieee-cs joint conference on digital libraries, pages
105   106. acm press, new york, 2007.

[217] n. mishra, r. schreiber, i. stanton, and r. e. tarjan. finding strongly-knit clusters

in social networks. internet mathematics, 5(1-2):155   174, 2008.

[218] m. mitzenmacher. a brief history of generative models for power law and lognormal

distributions. internet mathematics, 1(2):226   251, 2004.

[219] m. molloy and b. reed. a critical point for random graphs with a given degree

sequence. random structures and algorithms, 6(2   3):161   180, 1995.

83

[220] m. molloy and b. reed. the size of the largest component of a random graph on a

   xed degree sequence. combinatorics, id203 and computing, 7:295   306, 1998.

[221] j. moreno. who shall survive? nervous and mental disease publishing company,

washington, d.c., 1934.

[222] m. morris and m. kretzschmar. concurrent partnerships and transmission dynamics

in networks. social networks, 17(3   4):299   318, 1995.

[223] m. morris, m. s. handcock, w. c. miller, c. a. ford, j. l. schmitz, m. m. hobbs,
m. s. cohen, k. m. harris, and j. r. udry. prevalence of hiv infection among young
adults in the united states: results from the add health study. american journal
of public health, 96(6):1091   1097, 2006.

[224] m. morris, m. s. handcock, and d. r. hunter. speci   cation of exponential-family ran-
dom graph models: terms and computational aspects. journal of statistical software,
24(4), 2008. http://www.jstatsoft.org/v24/i04.

[225] q. morris, b. frey, and c. paige. denoising and untangling graphs using degree priors.
in advances in neural information processing systems (nips), volume 16. mit press,
cambridge, ma, 2003.

[226] s. mostafavi, d. ray, d. warde-farley, c. grouios, and q. morris. genemania:
a real-time multiple association network integration algorithm for predicting gene
function. genome biology, 9(suppl. 1):s4, 2008.

[227] e. nabieva, k. jim, a. agarwal, b. chazelle, and m. singh. whole-proteome predic-
tion of protein function via graph-theoretic analysis of interaction maps. bioinformat-
ics, 21(suppl. 1):i302   i310, 2005.

[228] r. m. neal. bayesian learning for neural networks, volume 118 of lecture notes in

statistics. springer-verlag, new york, 1996.

[229] j. neville and d. jensen. collective classi   cation with relational dependency networks.
in proceedings of the 2nd multi-relational data mining workshop, 9th acm sigkdd
international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 2003.

[230] j. neville, d. jensen, l. friedland, and m. hay. learning relational id203 trees.
in proceedings of the ninth acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining, pages 625   630. acm press, new york, 2003.

[231] m. newman, a.-l. barab  asi, and d. j. watts, editors. the structure and dynamics

of networks. princeton university press, 2006.

[232] m. e. j. newman. detecting community structure in networks. european physics

journal b, 38(2):321   330, 2004.

84

[233] m. e. j. newman. modularity and community structure in networks. proceedings of

the national academy of sciences, 103(23):8577   8582, 2006.

[234] m. e. j. newman. finding community structure in networks using the eigenvectors of

matrices. physical review e, 74(3):036104, 2006.

[235] m. e. j. newman, d. j. watts, and s. h. strogatz. random graph models of social
networks. proceedings of the national academy of science, 99(suppl. 1):2566   2572,
2002.

[236] k. nowicki and t. a. b. snijders. estimation and prediction for stochastic blockstruc-

tures. journal of the american statistical association, 96(455):1077   1087, 2001.

[237] m. nunkesser and d. sawitzki. blockmodels. in u. brandes and t. erlebach, editors,
network analysis, volume 3418 of lecture notes in computer science, pages 253   292.
springer berlin / heidelberg, 2005.

[238] j. o   madadhain, p. smyth, and l. adamic. learning predictive models for link for-
mation. in proceedings of the international sunbelt social network conference, 2005.

[239] j. park and m. e. j. newman. statistical mechanics of networks. physical review e,

70:066117, 2004.

[240] j. park and m. e. j. newman. solution of the two-star model of a network. physics

reviews e, 70:066146, 2004.

[241] p. e. pattison and s. s. wasserman. logit models and id28s for social
networks: ii. multivariate relations. british journal of mathematical and statistical
psychology, 52(2):169   193, 1999.

[242] d. m. pennock, g. w. flake, s. lawrence, e. j. glover, and c. l. giles. winners
don   t take all: characterizing the competition for links on the web. proceedings of the
national academy of sciences, 99(8):5207   5211, 2002.

[243] b. pittel. on tree census and the giant component in sparse random graphs. random

structures algorithms, 1(3):311   342, 1990.

[244] r. radner and a. tritter. communication in networks. technical report ec2098,

cowles commission, university of chicago, 1954.

[245] o. ratmann, o. j  rgensen, t. hinkley, m. p. h. stumpf, s. richardson, and c. wiuf.
using likelihood-free id136 to compare evolutionary dynamics of the protein net-
works of h. pylori and p. falciparum. plos computational biology, 3(11):2266   2278,
2007.

[246] o. ratmann, c. wiuf, and j. w. pinney. from evidence to id136: probing the

evolution of protein interaction networks. hfsp journal, 3(5):290   306, 2009.

85

[247] p. ravikumar. approximate id136, structure learning and feature estimation
in markov random fields. phd thesis, machine learning department, school of
computer science, carnegie mellon university, 2007.

[248] t. reguly, a. breitkreutz, l. boucher, b.-j. breitkreutz, g. c. hon, c. l. myers,
a. parsons, h. friesen, r. oughtred, a. tong, c. stark, y. ho, d. botstein, b. an-
drews, c. boone, o. g. troyanskya, t. ideker, k. dolinski, n. n. batada, and m. ty-
ers. comprehensive curation and analysis of global interaction networks in saccha-
romyces cerevisiae. journal of biology, 5(4):11, 2006.

[249] e. reid and h. chen. mapping the contemporary terrorism research domain: re-
searchers, publications, and institutions analysis. in intelligence and security infor-
matics, volume 3495 of lecture notes in computer science, pages 322   339. springer
berlin / heidelberg, 2005.

[250] e. reid, j. qin, w. chung, j. xu, y. zhou, r. schumaker, m. sageman, and h. chen.
terrorism knowledge discovery project: a knowledge discovery approach to addressing
the threats of terrorism.
in intelligence and security informatics, volume 3073 of
lecture notes in computer science, pages 125   145. springer berlin / heidelberg, 2004.

[251] a. rinaldo, s. e. fienberg, and y. zhou. on the geometry of discrete exponential
families with application to exponential random graph models. electronic journal of
statististics, 3:446   484, 2009.

[252] j. m. roberts, jr. simple methods for simulating sociomatrices with given marginal

totals. social networks, 22(3):273   283, 2000.

[253] g. l. robins and p. e. pattison. random graph models for temporal processes in

social networks. journal of mathematical sociology, 25:5   41, 2001.

[254] g. l. robins, p. e. pattison, and s. s. wasserman. logit models and id28s

for social networks: iii. valued relations. psychometrika, 64(3):371   394, 1999.

[255] g. l. robins, p. e. pattison, and j. woolcock. missing data in networks: exponential
random graph (p*) models for networks with non-respondents. social networks, 26(3):
257   283, 2004.

[256] g. l. robins, t. a. b. snijders, p. wang, m. s. handcock, and p. e. pattison. recent
developments in exponential random graph (p   ) models for social networks. social
networks, 29(2):192   215, 2007.

[257] t. t. rogers and j. l. mcclelland. semantic cognition: a parallel distributed pro-

cessing approach. mit press, cambridge, ma, 2004.

[258] m. j. salganik and d. d. heckathorn. sampling and estimation in hidden populations

using respondent-driven sampling. sociological methodology, 34:193   239, 2004.

86

[259] f. s. sampson. a novitiate in a period of change: an experimental and case study

of social relationships. phd thesis, cornell university, 1968.

[260] o. sandberg. searching in a small world. phd thesis, division of mathematical
statistics, department of mathematical sciences, chalmers university of technology
and g  oteborg university, g  oteborg, sweden, 2005.

[261] o. sandberg. neighbor selection and hitting id203 in small-world graphs. annals

of applied id203, 18(5):1771   1793, 2008.

[262] o. sandberg and i. clarke. the evolution of navigable small-world networks. http:

//arxiv.org/abs/cs/0607025, 2006.

[263] p. sarkar and a. w. moore. dynamic social network analysis using latent space
models. in advances in neural information processing systems (nips), volume 18,
pages 1145   1152. mit press, cambridge, ma, 2005.

[264] p. sarkar and a. w. moore. dynamic social network analysis using latent space models.

sigkdd explorations: special edition on link mining, 7(2):31   40, 2005.

[265] p. sarkar, s. m. siddiqi, and g. j. gordon. a latent space approach to dynamic
embedding of co-occurrence data. in proceedings of the 11th international conference
on arti   cial intelligence and statistics (ai-stats    07), 2007.

[266] c. r. shalizi, m. f. camperi, and k. l. klinkner. discovering functional communities
in dynamical networks. in e. m. airoldi, d. m. blei, s. e. fienberg, a. goldenberg,
e. p. xing, and a. zheng, editors, statistical network analysis: models, issues and
new directions, volume 4503 of lecture notes in computer science, pages 140   157.
springer berlin / heidelberg, 2007.

[267] b. shneiderman and a. aris. network visualization by semantic substrates. ieee

transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 12(5):733   740, 2006.

[268] g. simmel and k. h. wol   . the sociology of georg simmel. the free press, new

york, 1950.

[269] h. a. simon. on a class of skew distribution functions. biometrika, 42(3   4):425   440,

1955.

[270] b. singer and s. spilerman. social mobility models for heterogenous populations.

sociological methodology, 5:356   401, 1973   1974.

[271] b. singer and s. spilerman. the representation of social processes by markov models.

the american journal of sociology, 82(1):1   54, 1976.

[272] t. a. b. snijders. the transition probabilities of the reciprocity model. journal of

mathematical sociology, 23(4):241   253, 1999.

87

[273] t. a. b. snijders. the statistical evaluation of social network dynamics. sociological

methodology, 31:361   395, 2001.

[274] t. a. b. snijders. accounting for degree distributions in empirical analysis of network
dynamics. in r. l. breiger, k. m. carley, and p. e. pattison, editors, dynamic social
network modeling and analysis: workshop summary and papers, pages 146   161. the
national academies press, washington, d.c., 2003.

[275] t. a. b. snijders. models for longitudinal network data. in p. j. carrington, j. scott,
and s. s. wasserman, editors, models and methods in social network analysis, chap-
ter 11. cambridge university press, new york, 2005.

[276] t. a. b. snijders. statistical methods for network dynamics. in s. r. luchini et al.,
editors, proceedings of the xliii scienti   c meeting, italian statistical society, pages
281   296, padova: cleup, 2006.

[277] t. a. b. snijders and k. nowicki. estimation and prediction for stochastic blockmodels

for graphs with latent block structure. journal of classi   cation, 14(1):75   100, 1997.

[278] t. a. b. snijders and m. a. j. van duijin. simulation for statistical id136 in dy-
namic network models. in r. conte, r. hegselmann, and p. terna, editors, simulating
social phenomena, pages 493   512. springer, berlin, 1997.

[279] t. a. b. snijders and m. a. j. van duijn. conditional id113
under various speci   cations of exponential random graph models. in j. hagberg, edi-
tor, contributions to social network analysis, id205, and other topics
in statistics; a festschrift in honour of ove frank, pages 117   134. department of
statistics, university of stockholm, stockholm, sweden, 2002.

[280] t. a. b. snijders, p. e. pattison, g. l. robins, and m. s. handcock. new speci   cations

for exponential random graph models. sociological methodology, 36:99   153, 2006.

[281] r. solomono    and a. rapoport. connectivity of random nets. bulletin of mathematical

biology, 13(2):107   117, 1951.

[282] s. spilerman. structural analysis and the generation of sociograms. behavioral science,

11:312   318, 1966.

[283] m. stephens. bayesian analysis of mixtures with an unknown number of components   

an alternative to reversible jump methods. annals of statistics, 28(1):40   74, 2000.

[284] d. stork and w. richards. nonrespondents in communication network studies. group

& organization management, 17(2):193   209, 1992.

[285] d. b. stou   er, r. d. malmgren, and l. a. n. amaral. comment on barab  asi, nature

435, 207 (2005). http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0510216, 2005.

88

[286] d. b. stou   er, r. d. malmgren, and l. a. n. amaral. log-normal statistics in e-mail

communication patterns. http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0605027, 2008.

[287] d. strauss and m. ikeda. pseudolikelihood estimation for social networks. journal of

the american statistical association, 85(409):204   212, 1990.

[288] m. p. h. stumpf and t. thorne. multi-model

id136 of network properties
from incomplete data. journal of integrative bioinformatics, 3(2):32, 2006. http:
//journal.imbio.de/index.php?paper_id=32.

[289] m. p. h. stumpf, c. wiuf, and r. m. may. subnets of scale-free networks are not
scale-free: sampling properties of networks. proceedings of the national academy of
sciences, 102(12):4221   4224, 2005.

[290] s. swasey. net   ix awards $1 million net   ix prize and announces second $1 million

challenge. wall street journal, september 21, 2009.

[291] k. tarassov, v. messier, c. r. landry, s. radinovic, m. m. serna molina, i. shames,
y. malitskaya, j. vogel, h. bussey, and s. w. michnick. an in vivo map of the yeast
protein interactome. science, 320(5882):1465   1470, 2008.

[292] h. m. taylor and s. carlin. an introduction to stochastic modeling. academic press,

new york, 3rd edition, 1998.

[293] s. k. thompson. adaptive web sampling. biometrics, 62(4):1224   1234, 2006.

[294] s. k. thompson. targeted random walk designs. survey methodology, 32(1):11   24,

2006.

[295] s. k. thompson and o. frank. model-based estimation with link-tracing sampling

designs. survey methodolology, 26(1):87   98, 2000.

[296] s. k. thompson and g. a. f. seber. adaptive sampling. wiley, new york, 1996.

[297] d. m. titterington, a. f. m. smith, and u. e. makov. statistical analysis of finite

mixture distributions. john wiley & sons, new york, 1986.

[298] j. travers and s. milgram. an experimental study of the small world problem. so-

ciometry, 32(4):425   443, 1969.

[299] r. j. udry. the national longitudinal study of adolescent health: (add health) waves
i and ii, 1994   1996; wave iii, 2001   2002. technical report, carolina population
center, university of north carolina, chapel hill, 2003.

[300] p. uetz, l. giot, g. cagney, t. a. mans   eld, r. s. judson, j. r. knight, d. lock-
shon, v. narayan, m. srinivasan, p. pochart, a. qureshi-emili, y. li, b. godwin,
d. conover, t. kalb   eisch, g. vijayadamodar, m. yang, m. johnston, s. fields, and

89

j. m. rothberg. a comprehensive analysis of protein-protein interactions in saccha-
romyces cerevisiae. nature, 403(6770):623   627, 2000.

[301] m. a. j. van duijn, t. a. b. snijders, and b. j. h. zijlstra. p2: a random e   ects
model with covariates for directed graphs. statistica neerlandica, 58(2):234   254, 2004.

[302] m. a. j. van duijn, k. j. gile, and m. s. handcock. a framework for the comparison of
maximum pseudo-likelihood and id113 of exponential family
random graph models. social networks, 31(1):52   62, 2009.

[303] e. a. vance, e. a. archie, and c. j. moss. social networks in african elephants.
computational & mathematical organization theory, http: // www. springerlink.
com/ content/ enpk5g428272927m , 2008. to appear in print, 2009.

[304] a. v  azquez, j. g. oliveira, z. dezs  o, k. goh, i. kondor, and a.-l. barab  asi. modeling

bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics. physical review e, 73:036127, 2006.

[305] e. volz and d. d. heckathorn. id203 based estimation theory for respondent

driven sampling. journal of o   cial statistics, 24(1):79   97, 2008.

[306] e. volz and l. a. meyers. epidemic thresholds in dynamic contact networks. journal

of the royal society interface, 6(32):233   241, 2009.

[307] c. von mering, r. krause, b. snel, m. cornell, s. g. oliver, s. fields, and p. bork.
comparative assessment of large-scale data sets of protein-protein interactions. nature,
417(6887):399   403, 2002.

[308] m. j. wainwright and m. i. jordan. id114, exponential families, and
variational id136. foundations and trends in machine learning, 1(1   2):1   305,
2008.

[309] a. m. walczak, a. mugler, and c. h. wiggins. a stochastic spectral analysis of
transcriptional regulatory cascades. proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
106(16):6529   6534, 2009.

[310] y. wang, d. chakrabarti, c. wang, and c. faloutsos. epidemic spreading in real net-
works: an eigenvalue viewpoint. in proceedings of the 22nd international symposium
on reliable distributed systems (srds    03), pages 25   34, 2003.

[311] y. y. wang and g. y. wong. stochastic blockmodels for directed graphs. journal of

the american statistical association, 82(397):8   19, 1987.

[312] s. s. wasserman. stochastic models for directed graphs. phd thesis, department of

statistics, harvard university, 1977.

[313] s. s. wasserman. analyzing social networks as stochastic processes. journal of the

american statistical association, 75(370):280   294, 1980.

90

[314] s. s. wasserman and c. anderson. stochastic a posteriori blockmodels: construction

and assessment. social networks, 9(1):1   36, 1987.

[315] s. s. wasserman and k. faust. social network analysis: methods and applications.

cambridge university press, 1994.

[316] s. s. wasserman and p. e. pattison. logit models and id28 for social
networks: i. an introduction to markov graphs and p   . psychometrika, 61(3):401   425,
1996.

[317] s. s. wasserman, g. l. robins, and d. steinley. statistical models for networks: a
brief review of some recent research. in e. m. airoldi, d. m. blei, s. e. fienberg,
a. goldenberg, e. p. xing, and a. x. zheng, editors, statistical network analysis:
models, issues and new directions, volume 4503 of lecture notes in computer science.
springer berlin / heidelberg, 2007.

[318] d. j. watts. small worlds: the dynamics of networks between order and random-

ness. princeton university press, 1999.

[319] d. j. watts. six degrees: the science of a connected age. w. w. norton & company,

new york, 2003.

[320] d. j. watts and s. h. strogatz. collective dynamics of    small-world    networks. nature,

393(6684):440   442, 1998.

[321] h. c. white. search parameters for the small world problem. social forces, 49(2):

259   264, 1970.

[322] h. c. white, s. a. boorman, and r. l. breiger. social structure from multiple net-
works. i. blockmodels of roles and positions. the american journal of sociology, 81
(4):730   780, 1976.

[323] r. j. williams and n. d. martinez. simple rules yield complex food webs. nature,

404(6774):180   183, 2000.

[324] w. willinger, d. alderson, and j. c. doyle. mathematics and the internet: a source
of enormouse confusion and great potential. notices of the american mathematical
society, 56(5):586   599, 2009.

[325] c. wiuf and m. p. h. stumpf. binomial subsampling. journal of the royal society,

series a, 462(2068):1181   1195, 2006.

[326] c. wiuf, m. brameier, o. hagberg, and m. p. h. stumpf. a likelihood approach to
analysis of network data. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 103(20):
7566   7570, 2006.

91

[327] s. l. wong, l. v. zhang, a. h. y. tong, z. li, d. s. goldberg, o. d. king, g. lesage,
m. vidal, b. andrews, h. bussey, c. boone, and f. p. roth. combining biologi-
cal networks to predict genetic interactions. proceedings of the national academy of
sciences, 101(44):15682   15687, 2004.

[328] h. yu, p. braun, m. a. yildirim, i. lemmens, k. venkatesan, j. sahalie, t. hirozane-
kishikawa, f. gebreab, n. li, n. simonis, t. hao, j. f. rual, a. dricot, a. vazquez,
r. r. murray, c. simon, l. tardivo, s. tam, n. svrzikapa, c. fan, a. s. de smet,
a. motyl, m. e. hudson, j. park, x. xin, m. e. cusick, t. moore, c. boone, m. sny-
der, f. p. roth, a.-l. barab  asi, j. tavernier, d. e. hill, and m. vidal. high-quality
binary protein interaction map of the yeast interactome network. science, 322(5898):
104   110, 2008.

[329] g. u. yule. a mathematical theory of evolution, based on the conclusions of dr. j.
c. willis, f.r.s. philosophical transactions of the royal society of london, series b,
containing papers of a biological character, 213:21   87, 1925.

[330] w. w. zachary. an information    ow model for con   ict and    ssion in small groups.

journal of anthropological research, 33:452   473, 1977.

[331] a. zheng and a. goldenberg. a generative model for dynamic contextual friendship
networks. technical report, machine learning department, carnegie mellon univer-
sity, 2006.

[332] x. zhu, m. gerstein, and m. snyder. getting connected: analysis and principles of

biological networks. genes development, 21(9):1010   1024, 2007.

[333] b. j. h. zijlstra, m. a. j. van duijn, and t. a. b. snijders. the multilevel p2 model:
a random e   ects model for the analysis of multiple social networks. methodology, 2
(1):42   47, 2006.

92

