how to ask for a favor: a case study on the success of altruistic requests

tim althoff   , cristian danescu-niculescu-mizil   , dan jurafsky   

   stanford university,    max planck institute sws

althoff|jurafsky@stanford.edu, cristian@mpi-sws.org

4
1
0
2

 

y
a
m
3
1

 

 
 
]
l
c
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
8
2
3

.

5
0
4
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

requests are at the core of many social media systems such
as question & answer sites and online philanthropy commu-
nities. while the success of such requests is critical to the
success of the community, the factors that lead community
members to satisfy a request are largely unknown. success
of a request depends on factors like who is asking, how they
are asking, when are they asking, and most critically what
is being requested, ranging from small favors to substantial
monetary donations. we present a case study of altruistic re-
quests in an online community where all requests ask for the
very same contribution and do not offer anything tangible in
return, allowing us to disentangle what is requested from tex-
tual and social factors. drawing from social psychology liter-
ature, we extract high-level social features from text that op-
erationalize social relations between recipient and donor and
demonstrate that these extracted relations are predictive of
success. more speci   cally, we    nd that clearly communicat-
ing need through the narrative is essential and that linguistic
indications of gratitude, evidentiality, and generalized reci-
procity, as well as high status of the asker further increase the
likelihood of success. building on this understanding, we de-
velop a model that can predict the success of unseen requests,
signi   cantly improving over several baselines. we link these
   ndings to research in psychology on helping behavior, pro-
viding a basis for further analysis of success in social media
systems.

1

introduction

we live in a time where people increasingly turn to the
web for help. our needs, however, often go far beyond
mere information from existing webpages and we need
help from real people. for example, we ask for answers to
speci   c questions on stackover   ow.com, for donations on
donorschoose.org, or for help on online social communi-
ties such as reddit.com. in each of these cases a user per-
forms a request, which we de   ne as an act of asking for-
mally for something. all these communities rely heavily on
their members to help satisfy the request. yet, the factors
that lead community members to satisfy a request remain
largely unknown. understanding the dynamics and factors
of successful requests has the potential to substantially im-
prove such communities by educating users about better for-
copyright c(cid:13) 2014, association for the advancement of arti   cial
intelligence (www.aaai.org). all rights reserved.

mulating requests and promoting likely-to-succeed requests
(greenberg et al. 2013; mitra and gilbert 2014). in addi-
tion to these practical bene   ts, understanding the factors that
make a request successful has implications for questions in
social psychology and linguistic pragmatics.

studies on the popular crowdfunding platform kickstarter
have shown that the success of a request depends most
crucially on what is being requested, that is, whether it
is a small favor like an answer to a simple question or a
large    nancial contribution (mitra and gilbert 2014; mol-
lick 2014). many other factors need to be controlled as well;
what the giver receives in return, when they are asking, and
even group dynamics, since people are more likely to give
to projects that others are already giving to (etter, gross-
glauser, and thiran 2013; ceyhan, shi, and leskovec 2011;
mitra and gilbert 2014). satisfying a request on peer-to-peer
lending or crowd-funding platforms can also bring a reward,
and this also can drive the selection process. it is extremely
dif   cult to disentangle the effects of all these factors in deter-
mining what makes people satisfy requests, and what makes
them select some requests over others.

in this paper, we develop a framework for controlling for
each of these potential confounds while studying the role
of two aspects that characterize compelling requests: social
factors (who is asking and how the recipient is related to
the donor and community) and linguistic factors (how they
are asking and what linguistic devices accompany successful
requests). with the notable exception of mitra and gilbert
(2014), the effect of language on the success of requests has
largely been ignored thus far.1

our goal is to understand what motivates people to give
when they do not receive anything tangible in return. that is,
we focus on the important special case of altruistic requests
in which the giver receives no rewards. this controls for the
incentive to obtain attractive rewards commonly offered on
crowdfunding sites such as kickstarter; the absence of exter-
nal factors such as tangible rewards also makes the language
itself all the more important in persuading others to help. in
this domain we also do not need to consider crowdfunding-
related marketing strategies such as emphasizing limited

1linguistic factors have also been considered to in   uence the
response quantity, quality, and speed to questions in online com-
munities and social networks (teevan, morris, and panovich 2011;
burke et al. 2007, inter alia).

time offers (scarcity) or showing that other people made the
same decision already (social proof) (cialdini 2001), which
are known to manifest themselves in language (mitra and
gilbert 2014). second, we focus on requests that a single
user can ful   ll, thereby additionally eliminating group be-
havior effects such as herding (ceyhan, shi, and leskovec
2011) or completing donation biases (wash 2013). finally,
we focus on one community in which what is being asked
for is held constant. this allows us to explore a large num-
ber of different requests of different individual users, at dif-
ferent times, that all have the same goal. controlling for the
request goal therefore allows us to study how to optimize a
particular request solely by optimizing its presentation, and
helps provide a direct practical bene   t to the requester (by
contrast, advising a requester who needs something to in-
stead ask for something different may be advice of limited
practical use).

we therefore chose to study donations in    random acts
of pizza   , an online community devoted to giving away free
pizza to strangers that ask for one. random acts of pizza2
(raop) is a community within the social news and enter-
tainment website reddit.com. users can submit requests for
free pizza and if their story is compelling enough a fellow
user might decide to send them one,    because... who doesn   t
like helping out a stranger? the purpose is to have fun, eat
pizza and help each other out. together, we aim to restore
faith in humanity, one slice at a time.3    a typical post might
sound something like this:    it   s been a long time since my
mother and i have had proper food. i   ve been struggling to
   nd any kind of work so i can supplement my mom   s so-
cial security... a real pizza would certainly lift our spirits
(berman 2011).   

this platform addresses many of the potential confounds
that complicate other platforms or studies: all requests ask
for the same thing, a pizza, there are no additional incen-
tives or rewards, each request is satis   ed by a single user,
users and requests are embedded in a social network within
reddit, and requests are largely textual. this dataset thus
provides us with an unusually clear picture of the effect of
language and social factors on success.

the remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in-
spired by studies in crowdfunding, user-to-user evaluations
in social networks, and helping behavior in social psychol-
ogy, we introduce a variety of textual and social factors that
are potentially associated with successful requests. we use
id96 and automatic detection to extract a particu-
larly complex factor, the narrative structure of requests. we
employ a id28 framework to test what factors
matter in the community, showing that narratives are signif-
icantly correlated with success, and that signaling gratitude,
the intention to reciprocate in the future, supporting the nar-
rative with additional evidence, as well as a high status of
the user within the community further increase the chance of
success. we do not    nd any support for theories predicting
that positive sentiment, politeness, and user similarity are
associated with success. thus, drawing from social psychol-

2http://www.reddit.com/r/random_acts_of_pizza
3http://www.randomactsofpizza.com

ogy literature, our extracted high-level social features oper-
ationalize the relation between recipient and donor. we then
demonstrate in a prediction task that the proposed model
generalizes to unseen requests and signi   cantly improves
over several baselines.

2 the dataset

our dataset4 contains the entire history of the random acts
of pizza subreddit from december 8, 2010 to september 29,
2013 (21,577 posts total). to compute user features we fur-
ther crawled the entire lifetime history of posts and com-
ments across all subreddits for all users involved in the
raop subreddit (1.87m submissions total). the commu-
nity only publishes which users have given or received piz-
zas but not which requests were successful. in the case of
successful users posting multiple times it is unclear which
of the requests was actually successful. therefore, we re-
strict our analysis to users with a single request for which
we can be certain whether or not it was successful, leaving
us with 5728 pizza requests. we split this dataset into devel-
opment (70%) and test set (30%) such that both sets mirror
the average success rate in our dataset of 24.6%. all fea-
tures are developed on the development test only while the
test set is used only once to evaluate the prediction accuracy
of our proposed model on held-out data. for a small num-
ber of requests (379) we further observe the identity of the
benefactor through a    thank you    post by the bene   ciary af-
ter the successful request. this enables us to reason about
the impact of user similarity on giving.5

3 success factors of requests

previous work on crowdfunding, helping behavior and user-
to-user evaluations in social networks have pointed to a
number of textual and social factors that could in   uence the
success of a request.

3.1 textual factors of success
politeness a person experiencing gratitude is more likely
to behave prosocially towards their benefactor and others
(tsang 2006; bartlett and desteno 2006; mccullough et al.
2001). however, gratitude is only one component of polite-
ness (danescu-niculescu-mizil et al. 2013). other indica-
tors include deference, greetings, indirect language, apolo-
gizing and hedges. we ask a more general question: does a
polite request make you more likely to be successful?
evidentiality some requests emphasize the evidence for
the narrative or need. the literature on helping behavior lit-
erature suggests that urgent requests are met more frequently
than non-urgent requests (yinon and dovrat 1987; shotland
and stebbins 1983; colaizzi, williams, and kayson 1984;
gore, tobiasen, and kayson 1997).

4available at cs.stanford.edu/  althoff/raop-dataset/
5reddit   s front page showing the popular articles can skew ex-
posure, but this will not effect raop as posts generally receive
about two orders of magnitude less up-votes than would be neces-
sary to appear on reddit   s front page.

reciprocity in social psychology, reciprocity refers to re-
sponding to a positive action with another positive action.
people are more likely to help if they have received help
themselves (wilke and lanzetta 1970). since in altruistic
domains, there is no possibility of direct reciprocity, we hy-
pothesize that recipients might pay the kindness forward to
another community member, a concept known as    general-
ized reciprocity    (willer et al. 2013; gray, ward, and norton
2012; plickert, c  ot  e, and wellman 2007). feelings of grati-
tude can elicit this behavior (gray, ward, and norton 2012).
we hypothesize that the community would be more willing
to ful   ll the request of someone who is likely to contribute
to the community later on.

lost

sentiment while many requests are fairly negative, talk-
ing about
jobs,    nancial problems, or relationship
breakups, some of them are positive, asking for pizza for
birthday parties and other celebrations. helping behavior
literature predicts that positive mood is associated with a
higher likelihood of giving (forgas 1998; milberg and clark
1988). while these studies refer to the sentiment or emo-
tional state of the benefactor, the most closely related lin-
guistic feature that is available in this setting would be the
sentiment of the text. thus, the literature would predict that
very positive requests are more likely to succeed. we ad-
ditionally expect that very negative requests could be more
successful, too, since they most likely describe very unfor-
tunate situations of the requester.

length studies on the success of research grant proposals
have shown that the simple factor of request length can be
signi   cantly related to funding success even when control-
ling for a variety of other factors (lettice et al. 2012). we
hypothesize that longer requests will be interpreted as show-
ing more effort on the side of the requester and giving them
the opportunity to provide more evidence for their situation.

3.2 social factors
studies on crowdfunding have shown that the size of the so-
cial network of the project creator is associated with success
(mollick 2014; mitra and gilbert 2014). work on user-to-
user evaluations in online social networks suggests that the
success of a request depends on who you are as a user and
particularly that notions of user status and user similarity
could be in   uential in the process (anderson et al. 2012;
leskovec, huttenlocher, and kleinberg 2010; guha et al.
2004). we study both status and similarity in this work.

status studies in social psychology have found that peo-
ple of high status, e.g. de   ned by occupation or wealth, re-
ceive help more often (solomon and herman 1977; good-
man and gareis 1993).

similarity people are more likely to help those who
resemble them (colaizzi, williams, and kayson 1984;
chierco, rosa, and kayson 1982; emswiller, deaux, and
willits 1971). we predict that users will be more likely to
give pizza to users who are like them in some way.

3.3 what narratives drive success?
the textual part of a request, the narrative, has been shown
to signi   cantly in   uence the outcome in peer-to-peer lend-
ing platforms (herzenstein, sonenshein, and dholakia 2011;
greenberg et al. 2013; mitra and gilbert 2014). in order to
understand the nature and power of different narratives with-
out coding them manually (herzenstein, sonenshein, and
dholakia 2011), we explore automatic methods of narrative
extraction. consider the following two pizza requests:
example 1:

   my gf and i have hit some hard times with her losing her job
and then unemployment as well for being physically unable
to perform her job due to various hand injuries as a server in a
restuarant. she is currently petitioning to have unemployment
reinstated due to medical reasons for being unable to perform
her job, but until then things are really tight and anything
would help us out right now.
i   ve been both a giver and receiver in raop before and would
certainly return the favor again when i am able to reciprocate.
it took everything we have to pay rent today and some food
would go a long ways towards making our next couple of days
go by much better with some food.   

example 2:

   my friend is coming in town for the weekend and my friends
and i are so excited because we haven   t seen him since junior
high. we are going to a high school football game then to the
dollar theater after and it would be so nice if someone fed us
before we embarked :)   
while the    rst request (successful) goes into detail about
hard times (and claims to reciprocate) the second one (un-
successful) merely aims at    being fed   .

to identify the different kinds of stories we draw on pre-
vious literature suggesting that narratives can be automati-
cally extracted using id96 and related techniques
(chambers and jurafsky 2009; wallace 2012). we therefore
perform id96 through non-negative matrix factor-
ization (nmf) (hoyer 2004) of a tf-idf weighted bag-of-
words representation (salton and buckley 1988) of the re-
quests in our dataset. we additionally enforce sparsity on
the topic distribution for each request to shape the topics
in a way that captures most of a given request, and restrict
ourselves to nouns (using the stanford part-of-speech tag-
ger6). we choose to use 10 topics and use a svd-based ini-
tialization for nmf (boutsidis and gallopoulos 2008).

the resulting topics are shown in table 1 along with de-
scriptive names, the 15 highest-scoring terms and the suc-
cess rate (fraction of requests that successfully obtained
pizza). we observe that many topic clusters follow a speci   c
theme and that their success rates vary dramatically (the av-
erage success rate is 24.6%). topics money1 and money2
focus on money, and the high success rate of topic money1
(32.3%) suggests that this is a particularly successful nar-
rative. topic job is similarly successful (31.9%) and fea-
tures job related terms. a large number of requests further
seem to come from college students talking about studying
for classes and    nals, their roommates, and the university
(topic student). another narrative in the data are requests

6http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/

name
money1

money2

job

friend

student

time&family

time

gratitude

student

pizza

general

terms

sr
32.3% week ramen paycheck work couple rice
check pizza grocery rent anyone favor
someone bill money

23.6% food money house bill rent stamp month
today parent help pizza someone anything
mom anyone

31.9% job month rent year interview bill luck
school pizza paycheck unemployment
money ramen end check

17.0% friend house night mine pizza birthday
thing school site place family story way
movie anything

23.2% student college    nal pizza loan summer
university money class meal year semester
story kid school

23.5% tonight night

today tomorrow someone
anyone friday dinner something account
family bank anything home work

28.6% day couple anything today work pizza help
pay anyone home meal food ramen some-
one favor

27.0% thanks advance guy reading anyone pizza
anything story tonight help place everyone
craving kind favor

23.2% student college    nal pizza loan summer
university money class meal year semester
story kid school

20.0% pizza craving hut story someone anyone
domino money cheese thing request picture
act title kind

24.1% time pizza year people part work hour life
thing lurker story anything someone month
way

table 1: topics of requests identi   ed by non-negative matrix
factorization along with their success rate (sr). note that the
average success rate is 24.6%. due to space limitations, we
only display the 15 highest-scoring terms within each topic.

for and about family (topics time&family and money2).
this narrative can be identi   ed by the usage of words indi-
cating family relationships like kid, husband, family, mother,
wife, and parents (not all of them are included in the top 15
terms). topic friend stands out since it noticeably worse
than any other topic (17.0%). it captures requests asking for
pizza for a friend that is in town, to cater for parties, or to
provide culinary support for a night of movie watching with
the girlfriend. we hypothesize that stories of this topic dis-
play little actual need for pizza (particularly compared to
stories talking about money and job problems) and simply
communicate a pizza craving by the requester. we further
recognize that many requests employ previously de   ned fac-
tors such as gratitude (   thanks in advance    in topic grat-
itude), providing pictures as additional evidence, and the
intention to    pay it forward   .
automatic narrative detection this initial exploration
suggests that narratives differ substantially in how success-
ful they are. we de   ne concise lexicons for each of the nar-
ratives to detect their presence or absence automatically. it
would be possible to use a fully unsupervised approach us-
ing the lexicons generated through nmf but we    nd that
the topic boundaries are often not very clear and would

make it much harder to interpret the results. instead, we use
these topics as well as vocabulary from related liwc cat-
egories (linguistic inquiry and word count; tausczik and
pennebaker 2010) as inspiration to de   ne concise lexicons
for    ve different narratives identi   ed through topic model-
ing (money, job, student, family, craving). these lexicons
along with example posts for each narrative are shown in ta-
ble 2. to measure the usage of these narratives in requests we
de   ne simple word count features that measure how often a
given request mentions words from the narrative lexicons.

4 what factors are predictive of success?
in this section, we    rst introduce our methods for measuring
each factor and then present results on which of them are
predictive of success.

4.1 measuring the factors
temporal factors we control for temporal or seasonal ef-
fects in the data by measuring the speci   c months, week-
days, days of the month, or hour of the day as well as the the
month of the request since the beginning of the community,
i.e. the    community age   .
politeness we measure politeness by extracting all (19) in-
dividual features from the computational politeness model
introduced by danescu-niculescu-mizil et al. (2013).
evidentiality we study a simple measure of evidentiality
in raop posts: the presence of an image link within the
request text detected by a regular expression. many users
provide evidence for their claims to be broke or injured by
providing a picture, e.g., a screenshot of their empty bank
account or a picture of their arm in a cast. of the 84 images
in a random subsample of about 2000 posts, 86% included
some kind of evidence (an empty fridge, a job termination
letter, the user themselves, etc.).
reciprocity the concept of    paying kindness forward    to
someone other than your benefactor after being the recipi-
ent of a kind action is referred to as generalized reciprocity
in social psychology (willer et al. 2013). we measure lin-
guistic manifestations of generalized reciprocity by a sim-
ple binary feature based on id157 that indicates
whether the text includes any phrases like    pay it forward,   
   pay it back    or    return the favor.   
sentiment we extract sentiment annotation for each sen-
tence of the request using the stanford corenlp package7
and encode whether a request employs an above average
(median) fraction of positive sentiment sentences through
a binary feature (same for negative sentiment). we further
use count features based on lexicons of positive and nega-
tive words from liwc (normalized by length) and a regular
expression detecting emoticons to detect strong sentiment in
text.
length we use total number of words in the request as a
measure of length and hypothesize that longer requests will
be more successful on average.

7http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/

narrative terms
money

time
money now broke week until
last day when today tonight paid next
   rst night after tomorrow month while
account before long friday rent buy
bank still bills bills ago cash due due
soon past never paycheck check spent
years poor till yesterday morning dol-
lars    nancial hour bill evening credit
budget loan bucks deposit dollar cur-
rent payed
work job paycheck unemployment in-
terview    red employment hired hire

student

college
roommate
studying university    nals semester
class study project dorm tuition

school

family mom wife parents mother hus-
band dad son daughter father parent
mum

job

student

family

craving

friend girlfriend craving birthday
boyfriend celebrate party game games
movie date drunk beer celebrating in-
vited drinks crave wasted invite

example post
   broke until next paycheck, delaware. really hungry and some
pizza would be amazing right now. i had to pay to get my car re-
paired this week, leaving me with little money until next friday
when i get paid again. some pizza would be really amazing. i
would de   nitely pay it forward when i get paid next week.   

   this is my    rst raop, low on money would really enjoy a
pizza! hey, my roommate and i are running low on cash. he
lost his job last week and i had to pay his month   s rent, and i   m
going to have to until he    nds another job. if someone could
help us out with a pizza that would be great! thanks!   
   studying for    nals, no time to go get food. im studying for my
last batch of    nals before applying to college in the fall (transfer
student, community college path). very hungry but being broke
and having no calc textbook i   m really pressed for time :(   
   help out a dad please? [...] i   m    at out broke until tomorrow
with no food in the house for dinner tonight. my daughter is
2 and we usually do a pizza and movie night every once in a
while, and she   s been asking about it. i   ve got rent and car pay-
ment coming up, and bill collectors calling. i try to not let my
wife know exactly how bad we are when it gets like this, but
she mentioned we didn   t have anything for dinner tonight, and
i can   t get groceries until tomorrow.   
   i went out with some friends earlier in the week and ended up
lending my friend 20 bucks til he could get to an atm. long
story short, we ended up pretty silly drunk and crashed at dif-
ferent houses so he never got a chance to pay me back. i get
paid tomorrow and i could de   nitely tough it out, but i   d love
to down a few slices before i spend the night cleaning up my
apartment.   

table 2: the main narratives of textual requests discovered through id96, the terms used to detect them automatically
(sorted by frequency) and example posts illustrating each narrative.

status we measure status in three ways. first, we use
the karma points (up-votes minus down-votes) that red-
dit counts on link submissions and comments, which de-
   ne a notion of status in the reddit community. unfortu-
nately, reddit only publishes current karma scores for all
users. since we are only interested in features available at
prediction time, we make sure to exclude all events that oc-
curred after the request was    rst submitted and recompute
karma scores from the user   s full submission history up to
that point in time. second, we also measure whether or not
a user has posted on raop before and thus could be con-
sidered a member of the sub-community. third, we extract
the user account age based on the hypothesis that    younger   
accounts might be less trusted.
narrative to measure the usage of all    ve narratives in
requests we use word count features that measure how often
a given requests mentions words from the previously de   ned
narrative lexicons. we normalize these features by the total

number of words in the request to remove length effects.
here, we use median-thresholded binary variables for easier
interpretation but use decile-coded variants in the following
prediction task.

4.2 results
we model the success id203 of a request in a logistic
regression framework that allows us to reason about the sig-
ni   cance of one factor given all the other factors using suc-
cess as the dependent variable and the textual, social, and
temporal features as independent variables.

the id28 results are summarized in table 3
and are discussed next. we use a standard likelihood ratio
test to compute signi   cance scores.
temporal factors for temporal features we    nd that sea-
sonalities within a day and a year did not differentiate signif-
icantly between successful and unsuccessful requests. how-
ever, the success rate decreases signi   cantly with commu-

estimate
coef   cient
   2.02***
intercept
   0.13***
community age (decile)
0.22**
first half of month (binary)
0.27**
gratitude (binary)
0.81***
including image (binary)
0.32**
reciprocity (binary)
0.14
strong positive sentiment (binary)
strong negative sentiment (binary)    0.07
length (in 100 words)
karma (decile)
posted in raop before (binary)
narrative craving (binary)
narrative family (binary)
narrative job (binary)
narrative money (binary)
narrative student (binary)
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05

0.30***
0.13***
1.34***
   0.34***
0.22*
0.26**
0.19**
0.09

se
0.14
0.01
0.08
0.08
0.17
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.05
0.02
0.16
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.09

table 3: id28 results for textual, social, and
temporal features displaying parameter estimates and stan-
dard errors (se) for all features. statistical signi   cance is
calculated in a likelihood ratio test. all features except the
   student    narrative and sentiment signi   cantly improve the
model    t.

nity age. while the    rst 10% of requests had an average
success rate of 36.6%, the last 10% were only successful in
16.9% of all cases (mostly, because the number of requests
grew faster than the number of pizzas given out). further,
requests in the    rst half of the month tend to be more suc-
cessful (26.4%) than in the second half (23.0%); we encode
this as a binary feature.

politeness out of all 19 politeness features we    nd that
only gratitude is signi   cantly correlated with success when
controlling for temporal, social, and other textual features.
thus, we only include gratitude in our    nal model.

politeness is the expression of the speakers intention to
mitigate face threats carried by certain face threatening acts
toward another (brown and levinson 1987). we speculate
that in this controlled environment there is very little room
for face-threats as the roles are very well de   ned: requesters
do not offend any potential giver by asking for a pizza but
do exactly what is expected; potential givers can choose not
to satisfy a particular request without face-threat (no direct
interaction). without face-threats there is no need for po-
liteness to cover the acts of the requester or to provide the
potential giver with a face-saving way to deny the request.

evidentiality including an image greatly increases the
chance of success (second largest parameter estimate) pro-
viding strong support for the hypothesis that proving addi-
tional evidence makes you more likely to succeed. we at-
tribute this to the fact that most pictures communicate need

and urgency as well as establish an increased level of trust
between requester and giver.

reciprocity we    nd that the simple linguistic indication
of willingness to give back to the community signi   cantly
increases the likelihood of success.

this    nding raises the question whether those users who
claim to give back to the community actually live up to this
claim. to answer this question we restrict our data to only
those requests that were actually successful. we    nd that on
average 5.9% of successful users reciprocate (baseline rate).
out of those that claim to    pay it forward    after receiving
a pizza 9.9% actually do. while this seems like a disap-
pointingly small fraction it is conceivable that many users
have not yet been able to help someone else out and might
still do so in the future. and indeed, this fraction is signi   -
cantly larger than the baseline rate according to a binomial
test (p < 0.01).

does gratitude predict generalized reciprocity as sug-
gested by gray, ward, and norton (2012)? we    nd that users
that express gratitude in their request return the favor 7.2%
of the time which exhibits only a slightly trend to be larger
than the baseline (one-tailed binomial test, p = 0.115).

we also note that high status (karma in top 20%) is also
positively correlated with reciprocity (one-tailed binomial
test, p < 0.05).

sentiment we    nd that sentiment stops being signi   -
cantly correlated with success when controlling for the other
variables. similar results hold when using the fraction of
sentences with positive/negative sentiment, thresholded ver-
sions of those features, other sentiment models and lexicons
(liwc) as well as emoticon detectors. this lack of relation-
ship between sentiment and success may be a masking ef-
fect, due to the correlation between positive sentiment and
other variables like reciprocity (pearson correlation coef   -
cient r = .08) and word length (r = .10).

length longer requests are signi   cantly correlated with
success. we attribute this to the fact that longer requests give
the user the opportunity to provide more evidence for their
situation. length is arguably the most simple and accessible
feature associated with success.

status we    nd account age to be strongly correlated with
karma (r = .75). this means that the    senior    users within
the community tend to have high status (note that these are
senior users that are still active as opposed to all senior user
accounts). therefore, we only include the karma score as
a decile-coded variable (indicating the decile in the overall
karma distribution) in the model. status, in both in the red-
dit community as well as the raop subcommunity, turns
out to be strongly correlated with success. having posted
before in roap also has a particularly strong positive effect
on success. people are more likely to help users that have
contributed to the community in some form already (willer
2009).

narrative all narratives signi   cantly improve the    t ex-
cept for the    student    narrative. the    job   ,    money   , and

features
random baseline
unigram baseline
bigram baseline
trigram baseline
text features
social features
temporal features
temporal + social
temporal + social + text
temporal + social + text + unigram

roc auc
0.500
0.621***
0.618***
0.618***
0.625***
0.576***
0.579***
0.638***
0.669***
0.672***

table 4: prediction results for id28 models
using different sets of features. all models improve sig-
ni   cantly upon the random baseline according to mann   
whitney u tests (p < 0.001).

quest (50 words) following the craving but no other narra-
tive (assuming median karma and community age) has an
estimated success id203 of 9.8%. using narratives that
actually display more need, say the job and money narrative
instead increases the chance to success to 19.4%, more than
twice the previous id203. now consider another user
who is smarter about how she formulates her request. she
puts in additional effort by writing more, say 150 words, and
provides more evidence with a picture to support her narra-
tive. she also makes sure to display gratitude to the commu-
nity and offers to forward a pizza to someone else once she
is in a better position. by tweaking her request in a simple
way she increases her chances to 56.8%, a dramatic increase
over the former request.

5

is success predictable?

we demonstrated that textual, social and temporal factors all
signi   cantly improve the    t of a id28 model.
now, we study to what degree the model is able to generalize
and predict the success of unseen requests from the held-out
test set. because of the unbalanced dataset and the trade-off
between true and false positive rate associated with predic-
tion we choose to evaluate using the area under the receiver
operating characteristic (roc) curve (auc) which is equal
to the id203 that a classi   er will rank a randomly cho-
sen positive instance higher than a randomly chosen negative
one.8 delong   s test for two correlated roc curves is used to
test for statistical signi   cant differences in the models (de-
long, delong, and clarke-pearson 1988).

table 4 summarizes the performance of a l1-penalized
id28 model (friedman, hastie, and tibshirani
2010) for different sets of features.9 we include models us-
ing the standard uni-, bi- and trigram features (mitra and
gilbert 2014) as baselines. we further include a random

8note that this is closely related to the mann   whitney u statis-

tic (cortes and mohri 2004).

comparable performance.

9we also experimented with support vector machines, with

figure 1: estimated id203 of success across request
lengths for different narratives (top to bottom: job, family,
money, student, craving).

figure 2: estimated id203 of success across status
deciles for different narratives (top to bottom: job, family,
money, student, craving).

   family    narratives increase the predicted id203 of suc-
cess, while the    craving    narrative has strongly negative in-
   uence. this provides strong support for our hypothesis that
narratives that clearly communicate need (   job   ,    money   )
are more successful than those that do not (   craving   ).

interpretation

4.3
the id28 parameters correspond to changes in
log odds space rather than id203 space and are there-
fore more dif   cult to interpret. the change in probabil-
ity space for different request lengths (median length is 74
words) is given in figure 1 for the different narratives (as-
suming all other narratives are absent). figure 2 depicts the
estimated success id203 for different values of status
(karma). both plots assume that the request does not in-
clude an image, gratitude, or reciprocity claim and assumes
median values for karma (or length respectively) as well as
community age (thus, the success probabilities are below av-
erage).

to understand the opportunity to optimize how one is ask-
ing for a favor and the importance to educate users about
critical factors consider the following example: a short re-

0.080.120.160.200.24050100150200request length in wordsestimated id203narrativecravingfamilyjobmoneystudent0.050.100.150.200.2502468status decileestimated id203narrativecravingfamilyjobmoneystudentand compare it with that of random pairs of other givers and
receivers (pairs that did not occur in the data). the latter
pairing is equivalent to a random rewiring of edges in the bi-
partite graph between givers and receivers which we use as
a null model: if users are indeed more likely to give to other
users that are similar to them we expect the similarity of
actual giver-receiver pairs in our dataset to be signi   cantly
larger than the similarity of the randomly rewired pairs.

the resulting similarity distributions for both actual and
random pairs for both metrics are shown in figure 3 (ker-
nel density estimate using a gaussian kernel with bandwidth
0.5 for intersection size and 0.03 for jaccard). the similarity
distributions for actual and random pairs match very closely,
a    nding that is robust across both choices of similarity met-
rics. thus, we conclude that we do not    nd any evidence that
user similarity, at least in terms of their interest and activity
as measured here, has a signi   cant effect on giving. they
may be other indicators of similarity including geography,10
similar life situations or similar language use. in future work
we plan to investigate other types of user similarity and their
effect on helping behavior in online communities. note that
we do not include user similarity as a feature in the logistic
regression model above since we only observe givers for a
small subset of requests.

7 conclusion

online platforms have created a new mechanism for people
to seek aid from other users. many online communities such
as question & answer sites and online philanthropy commu-
nities are created for the express purpose of facilitating this
exchange of help. it is of critical importance to these com-
munities that requests get addressed in an effective and ef-
   cient manner. this presents a clear opportunity to improve
these online communities overall as well as improving the
chance of success of individual requests. however, the fac-
tors that lead to requests being ful   lled are still largely un-
known. we attribute this to the fact that the study of how
one should ask for a favor is often complicated by large ef-
fects of what the requester is actually asking for. we have
presented a case study of an online community where all re-
quests ask for the very same contribution, a pizza, thereby
naturally controlling for this effect and allowing us to disen-
tangle what is requested from textual and social factors.

drawing from social psychology literature we extract
high-level social features from text that operationalize the
relation between recipient and donor and demonstrate that
these extracted relations are predictive of success. we show
that we can detect key narratives automatically that have
signi   cant impact on the success of the request. we further
demonstrate that linguistic indications of gratitude, eviden-
tiality, and reciprocity, as well as the high status of the asker,
all increase the likelihood of success, while neither polite-
ness nor positive sentiment seem to be associated with suc-
cess in our setting.

we link these    ndings to research in psychology on help-
ing behavior (see table 5). for example, our work extends

10we extracted location entities from the pizza requests but

found them to be very sparse.

figure 3: kernel density estimate of the similarity distribu-
tion of actual and random pairs using intersection size (left)
and jaccard similarity (right) as similarity metric. we do not
   nd any signi   cant difference between the two distributions.

baseline for comparison of roc auc scores. it is impor-
tant to note that there is no signi   cant difference between
our textual model with only 9 features and the uni-, bi- and
trigram baselines which have orders of magnitude more fea-
tures (delong   s test, p     0.612). both social and temporal
features are predictive of success on held-out data as well.
combining the different feature sets yields signi   cant per-
formance improvements from temporal (0.579) over tempo-
ral + social (0.638; signi   cant improvement over individual
models at p < 0.001 in both cases), to all three sets of factors
(0.669; signi   cant improvement at p < 0.001 over textual
model and at p < 0.01 over temporal + social model). lastly,
we demonstrate that a unigram model does not signi   cantly
improve predictive accuracy when combined with the pro-
posed textual, social and temporal factors (0.672; delong   s
test, p = 0.348). this shows that our very concise set of tex-
tual factors (narratives, evidentiality, gratitude, reciprocity,
and length) accounts for almost all the variance that can be
explained using simple textual models.

although our best model (0.669) is far from perfect
(1.000) all models signi   cantly improve upon the random
baseline (mann   whitney u test, p < 0.001). it is worth
pointing out that we are purposely dealing with a very dif-
   cult setting     since the goal is to assist the user during
request creation we do not use any factors that can only be
observed later (e.g. responses, updates and comments), even
though such factors have been shown to have strong predic-
tive value (etter, grossglauser, and thiran 2013; mitra and
gilbert 2014).

6 does user similarity increase giving?

social psychology literature suggests that individuals are
more likely to help other individuals that are similar to
themselves (colaizzi, williams, and kayson 1984; chierco,
rosa, and kayson 1982; emswiller, deaux, and willits
1971). to test this hypothesis we create a measure of user
similarity by representing users by their interests in terms
of the set of subreddits in which they have posted at least
once (prior to requesting pizza), and employing two differ-
ent similarity metrics: intersection size between the set of
the giver and receiver and the jaccard similarity (intersection
over union) of the two. information about subreddit over-
lap is easily accessible to users by a single click on a user   s
username. we compute the similarity of giver-receiver pairs

05101520intersection size0.000.050.100.150.200.250.30id203 density estimateactual pairsrandom pairs0.00.20.40.60.81.0jaccard similarity01234567id203 density estimateactual pairsrandom pairscategory
gratitude

reciprocity

urgency

status

prediction by literature
a person experiencing gratitude is more
likely to behave prosocially towards their
benefactor and others (tsang 2006; bartlett
and desteno 2006; mccullough et al. 2001).

people are more likely to help if they re-
ceived help themselves (wilke and lanzetta
1970). the concept of paying kindness for-
ward (rather than back) is known as    gen-
eralized reciprocity    in psychology (willer
et al. 2013; gray, ward, and norton 2012;
plickert, c  ot  e, and wellman 2007).
urgent requests are met more frequently
than non-urgent requests (yinon and dovrat
1987; shotland and stebbins 1983; colaizzi,
williams, and kayson 1984; gore, tobiasen,
and kayson 1997).
people of high status receive help more often
(solomon and herman 1977; goodman and
gareis 1993; willer 2009).

mood/sentiment positive mood improves the likelihood of
helping and compliance (forgas 1998; mil-
berg and clark 1988).

similarity

persons are more likely to help other peo-
ple when the similarity between them is
high (colaizzi, williams, and kayson 1984;
chierco, rosa, and kayson 1982; em-
swiller, deaux, and willits 1971).

finding of this case study
  studies on gratitude typically focus on the gratitude
experienced by the benefactor. we    nd that gratitude can
be paid    forward    before the request becomes ful   lled and
that expressions of gratitude by the requester signi   cantly
increase their chance of success. however, we    nd no evi-
dence that politeness, more generally, has a statistically sig-
ni   cant impact on success in our case study.
  the language of reciprocity (   return the favor   ) is used
in a variety of ways to signal the willingness to give back
to the community by helping out another member in the fu-
ture (generalized reciprocity). such claims are signi   cantly
correlated with higher chances of success.

  we    nd that narratives that clearly express need (job,
money) are more likely to succeed that narratives that do
not (craving). additional support of such narratives through
more evidence (images or text) further increased the chance
of success.
  we    nd that reddit users with higher status overall
(higher karma) or higher status within the subcommunity
(previous posts) are signi   cantly more likely to receive help.
  when controlling for other textual, social, and tempo-
ral factors we do not    nd the sentiment of the text (not the
sentiment of the reader) to be signi   cantly correlated with
success.
  measuring similarity as the number of subcommunities
that both receiver and giver are active in reveals no signif-
icant difference between actual pairs of giver and receiver
and a null model of user similarity.

table 5: a summary of predictions by literature on helping behavior in psychology compared to    ndings of this case study.

psychological results on of   ine communities to show that
people behave pro-socially in online communities toward re-
questors who are of high status, display urgency, and who of-
fer to pay it forward. other novel contributions of our work
include the    nding that linguistic indications of gratitude
lead to pro-social behavior, and the result that higher status
users are more likely to demonstrate generalized reciprocity.
our results thus offer new directions for the understanding
of pro-social behavior in communities in general, as well
as providing a basis for further analysis of success in social
media systems.

we must recognize a number of limitations: a shortcom-
ing of any case study is that    ndings might be speci   c to
the scenario at hand. while we have shown that particular
linguistic and social factors differentiate between successful
and unsuccessful requests we cannot claim a causal relation-
ship between the proposed factors and success that would
guarantee success. furthermore, the set of success factors
studied in this work is likely to be incomplete as well and ex-
cludes, for instance, group behavior dynamics. despite these
limitations, we hope that this work and the data we make

available will provide a basis for further research on success
factors and helping behavior in other online communities.
acknowledgements we thank christina brandt and jure
leskovec for many helpful discussions, niloufar salehi and
tuan nguyen for helping with computing user similarity and
statistical analysis, and julian mcauley for the original idea
to use the raop dataset. we also thank reddit user    jimwll   
who generously provided pizza when we most needed it and
the anonymous reviewers for their altruistic comments. this
work was supported in part by nsf iis-1016909.

references

effects of user similarity in social media.

anderson, a.; huttenlocher, d.; kleinberg, j.; and leskovec, j.
in proc.
2012.
wsdm   12.
bartlett, m. y., and desteno, d. 2006. gratitude and prosocial be-
havior helping when it costs you. psychological science 17(4):319   
325.
berman,
donate.
donate/story?id=13950694. last accessed on 1/20/2014.

random acts of pizza: how to
http://abcnews.go.com/us/random-acts-pizza-

2011.

j.

in   uence: science and practice. boston:

boutsidis, c., and gallopoulos, e. 2008. svd based initialization:
a head start for nonnegative id105. pattern recog-
nition 41(4):1350   1362.
brown, p., and levinson, s. c. 1987. politeness: some universals
in language usage. cambridge university press.
burke, m.; joyce, e.; kim, t.; anand, v.; and kraut, r. 2007.
introductions and requests: rhetorical strategies that elicit re-
sponse in online communities. in communities and technologies
2007. springer. 21   39.
ceyhan, s.; shi, x.; and leskovec, j. 2011. dynamics of bidding
in a p2p lending service: effects of herding and predicting loan
success. in proc. www   11.
chambers, n., and jurafsky, d. 2009. unsupervised learning of
narrative schemas and their participants. in proc. acl   09.
chierco, s.; rosa, c.; and kayson, w. a. 1982. effects of location,
appearance, and monetary value on altruistic behavior. psycholog-
ical reports 51(1):199   202.
cialdini, r. b. 2001.
allyn & bacon.
colaizzi, a.; williams, k. j.; and kayson, w. a. 1984. when
will people help? the effects of gender, urgency, and location on
altruism. psychological reports 55(1):139   142.
cortes, c., and mohri, m. 2004. con   dence intervals for the area
under the roc curve. in proc. nips   04.
danescu-niculescu-mizil, c.; sudhof, m.; jurafsky, d.; leskovec,
j.; and potts, c. 2013. a computational approach to politeness
with application to social factors. in proc. acl   13.
delong, e. r.; delong, d. m.; and clarke-pearson, d. l. 1988.
comparing the areas under two or more correlated receiver oper-
ating characteristic curves: a nonparametric approach. biometrics
837   845.
emswiller, t.; deaux, k.; and willits, j. e. 1971. similarity, sex,
and requests for small favors. journal of applied social psychology
1(3):284   291.
etter, v.; grossglauser, m.; and thiran, p. 2013. launch hard or
go home! predicting the success of kickstarter campaigns.
in
proc. cosn   13.
forgas, j. p. 1998. asking nicely? the effects of mood on re-
sponding to more or less polite requests. personality and social
psychology bulletin 24(2):173   185.
friedman, j.; hastie, t.; and tibshirani, r. 2010. id173
paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent. journal
of statistical software 33(1):1.
goodman, m. d., and gareis, k. c. 1993. the in   uence of status
on decisions to help. the journal of social psychology 133(1):23   
31.
gore, k. y.; tobiasen, m. a.; and kayson, w. a. 1997. effects of
sex of caller, implied sexual orientation of caller, and urgency on
altruistic response using the wrong number technique. psycholog-
ical reports 80(3):927   930.
gray, k.; ward, a. f.; and norton, m. i. 2012. paying it forward:
generalized reciprocity and the limits of generosity. journal of
experimental psychology.
greenberg, m. d.; pardo, b.; hariharan, k.; and gerber, e. 2013.
crowdfunding support tools: predicting success & failure. in proc.
chi   13.
guha, r.; kumar, r.; raghavan, p.; and tomkins, a. 2004. prop-
agation of trust and distrust. in proc. www   04.

herzenstein, m.; sonenshein, s.; and dholakia, u. m. 2011. tell
me a good story and i may lend you money: the role of nar-
ratives in peer-to-peer lending decisions. journal of marketing
research 48(spl):138   149.
hoyer, p. o. 2004. non-negative id105 with sparse-
ness constraints. jmlr 5:1457   1469.
leskovec, j.; huttenlocher, d.; and kleinberg, j. 2010. signed
networks in social media. in proc. chi   10.
lettice, f.; smart, p.; baruch, y.; and johnson, m. 2012. navi-
gating the impact-innovation double hurdle: the case of a climate
change research fund. research policy 41(6):1048   1057.
mccullough, m. e.; kilpatrick, s. d.; emmons, r. a.; and larson,
d. b. 2001. is gratitude a moral affect? psychological bulletin
127(2):249.
milberg, s., and clark, m. s. 1988. moods and compliance. british
journal of social psychology 27(1):79   90.
mitra, t., and gilbert, e. 2014. the language that gets peo-
ple to give: phrases that predict success on kickstarter. in proc.
cscw   14.
mollick, e. 2014. the dynamics of crowdfunding: an exploratory
study. journal of business venturing 29(1):1   16.
plickert, g.; c  ot  e, r. r.; and wellman, b. 2007. it   s not who you
know, it   s how you know them: who exchanges what with whom?
social networks 29(3):405   429.
salton, g., and buckley, c. 1988. term-weighting approaches in
information processing & management
automatic text retrieval.
24(5):513   523.
shotland, r. l., and stebbins, c. a. 1983. emergency and cost
as determinants of helping behavior and the slow accumulation of
social psychological knowledge. social psychology quarterly 36   
46.
solomon, h., and herman, l. 1977. status symbols and prosocial
behavior: the effect of the victim   s car on helping. the journal of
psychology 97(2):271   273.
tausczik, y. r., and pennebaker, j. w. 2010. the psychological
meaning of words: liwc and computerized text analysis methods.
journal of language and social psychology 29(1):24   54.
teevan, j.; morris, m. r.; and panovich, k. 2011. factors affect-
ing response quantity, quality, and speed for questions asked
via social network status messages. in proc. icwsm   11.
tsang, j.-a. 2006. gratitude and prosocial behaviour: an experi-
mental test of gratitude. cognition & emotion 20(1):138   148.
wallace, b. 2012. multiple narrative disentanglement: unraveling
in   nite jest. in proc. naacl hlt   12.
wash, r. 2013. the value of completing crowdfunding projects.
in proc. icwsm   13.
wilke, h., and lanzetta, j. t. 1970. the obligation to help: the
effects of amount of prior help on subsequent helping behavior.
journal of experimental social psychology 6(4):488   493.
willer, r.; flynn, f. j.; feinberg, m.; mensching, o.; de mello fer-
reira, v. r.; bianchi, a. m.; choshen-hillel, s.; weisel, o.; peng,
k.; and fetchenhauer, d. 2013. do people pay it forward? grati-
tude fosters generalized reciprocity.
willer, r. 2009. groups reward individual sacri   ce: the status
solution to the collective action problem. american sociological
review 74(1):23   43.
yinon, y., and dovrat, m. 1987. the reciprocity-arousing potential
of the requester   s occupation, its status and the cost and urgency of
the request as determinants of helping behavior. journal of applied
social psychology 17(4):429   435.

