(h) fan fiction (1/2) 

gave spiral the truly poisoned, neville the shoulder invisibility 

mary su.0 is a fan-fiction writing robot. fan fiction is a fiction written by people using another author   s char-
acters. unfortunately, she   s not very good at what she does. mary writes fan-fiction by reading the text of a 
book (or series of books) and randomly generating new sentences based on the text. her latest effort is fan-
fiction based on the harry potter book series. 
 
mary su.0 has a few different methods that she   s able to use for generating sentences. the first class of 
methods are called id165 methods. the simplest of these methods is the unigram method. in the unigram 
method, mary chooses each token of the sentence completely randomly from the entire vocabulary of the 
book she read. (a token can also be a punctuation mark.) an example of a sentence generated using this 
method might look like this: 
 
 
 
a second method is the bigram method. in this method, mary first finds all the tokens that were used to 
start a sentence in the text and randomly chooses one of these to start the sentence. then she builds the rest 
of the sentence by looking at the most recent token generated, finding all tokens that occur immediately 
after that token in the text, and randomly choosing one of these. for example, if the most recently generated 
token was    red   , mary would find all the tokens in the text that immediately follow    red   , {   hair   , 
   curtains   ,    as   ,    } and randomly choose one of these to be the next word. a sentence generated using the 
bigram method might look like this: 
 
 
 
a third method is called the trigram method. this method is very similar to the bigram method, but uses the 
previous two tokens (instead of the previous one) to decide what the next token will be. a sentence generat-
ed using the trigram method might look like this: 
 
 
 
the last method that mary can use to generate sentences is called the context free method. this method 
starts by taking each sentence in the text and generating a grammar tree, like the one below, for it. 

but harry hardly noticed that six extra chairs.    

face your nose noisily after you saying stuff. 

np 

 s 

vp 

nnp 

nnp 

vbd 

np 

pp 

sirius  black  lent  prp 

to 

np 

 

 

 

 

 

 

it 

to 

 

 

prp 

me 

. 

. 

 

 

 

(h) fan fiction (2/2) 

the next question will cast by ron. 

the symbols that aren   t words refer to labels of words or larger sequences. some symbols refer to parts of 
speech, such as nnp for proper noun, prp for personal pronoun, vbd for a verb in past tense, and to for 
preposition. other labels refer to sequences of words that form units, such as s for sentence,  np for a noun 
phrase, a sequence of one or more words that behaves like a noun (e.g. dogs or the big dogs), and vp for a 
verb phrase, which is a sequence of one or more words that behaves like a verb (e.g. goes or went to the 
store). 
 
to generate a new sentence, she first generates an    s    which represents a sentence. then she looks through 
her collection of grammar trees for all the sets of symbols ([np vp .] for example) that occur immediately un-
der an    s   . she then repeats this process recursively for each of the new items generated until the tree has 
no more nodes that can be expanded (once a token is generated, it cannot be expanded). a sentence gener-
ated by this method might look like this: 
 
 
 
h1. below is a collection of sentences. two of them are real sentences from the harry potter series. the 
rest were generated using one of the methods above; each method generated at least two sentences. write 
either    u    for unigram,    b    for bigram,    t    for trigram, or    c    for context-free to indicate the method that 
most likely generated that sentence, or if you think the sentence was not automatically generated, write    r    
for real. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

a. headmaster uninjured could that was malfoy that badges 
b. he bent over top of the water blushing furiously. 
c. there were crouching in your bedroom. 
d. he lived about a hundred wizards were closing. 
e. ron spooned iron bolts, keyholes, and a heavy wooden breadboard on to her 
e. back and picked up a fistful. 
f. "what?" said harry. 
g.    sorry!    he said," said mr. malfoy's eyes. 
h. harry wasn't," said dumbledore went slightly surprised. 
i. years beginning at to annoyance spider!" just months harry 
j. you might have been an impostor. 
k. they'll be the first to rise up in the invisibility cloak on," said  

professor flitwick pressed a box into his bag. 

 

l. the broom gave them an enormous wink. 

a. 

 

i. 

 

 

 

 

 

  b. 

 

 

 

 

j. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. 

 

 

 

 

k. 

 

 

 

 

 

  d. 

 

 

 

 

l. 

 

 

 

 

 

  e. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

f. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  g. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  h. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

