(m) minimum spelling trees (1/3) 

computing devices are limited by their available memory. one can, however, use clever methods to reduce 
the amount of memory needed to store a text. if one word is already represented in memory, then a similar 
word can be represented compactly by recording only the differences from the original word. 
 
the german word for "house" is "haus". german has multiple ways to say "the house" depending on the syn-
tactic role (case) it plays in the sentence. "das haus" is used as the subject or direct object of a sentence 
(nominative or accusative case): "das haus ist gr  n" (the house is green) or "tom liebt das haus" (tom 
loves the house). "des hauses" is used for possessives (genitive case) as in "des hauses t  r" (the house's 
door). "dem haus" (dative case) is used with indirect objects and some locations as in "auf dem haus" (on 
the house). in this puzzle, we will just be concerned with the noun haus itself, not with the articles (das, dem, 
des). the table below shows the singular and plural forms of haus in each syntactic role (case). 

 

 

 

 

 

singular 

nominative  haus 

genitive 

hauses 

plural 

h  user2 

h  user 

dative 

haus, hause (archaic)  h  usern 

accusative 

haus 

h  user 

for a computer to remember all of these forms, it must efficiently encode them. to do so, we will encode 
each of the words in the set based on either an already-encoded word in the set or the empty word, along 
with a series of changes. the changes specify letters to add or remove, and are the shortest description pos-
sible given the pair of words. we write the changes and resulting words after each word 
already encoded. for example: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4+s      
3+u 
( 5+e  6+s      
    h a u s e s     ( 2-a  2+  3  6-s 
 
 

( 1+h  2+a 
    h a u s     
 
 
 

    h    u s e r     ) 
( 2-a  2+   

(         
 
 
 
 

7+n      

6+r      

6+r 

6-s 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

    h    u s e r n     ) ) ) ) 

 
 
above, "h  user" and "h  usern" are encoded from "hauses", which is encoded from "haus", which in turn is 
encoded from the empty word "". the total cost of encoding the set of words is the total number of charac-
ter changes overall: 4 + 2 + 4 + 5 = 15. 
 
 
1german also marks case on the article, but that doesn   t matter for this problem. 
2vowels with umlauts (the two dots) are pronounced differently from their unmarked counterparts. some nouns in german, like 
haus, have vowels which change depending on their form. here, the singular haus has no umlaut, but the plural h  user does. eng-
lish has a similar phenomenon in words like foot/feet. 
3note that a and    are two different symbols and that    is one symbol, not the combination of a and   . 

(m) minimum spelling trees (2/3) 

answer these questions in the answer sheets. 
 
m1. what is the least costly way of encoding the words "haus", "hauses", "h  user", and "h  usern"?  what is 
its cost? 

cost: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

m2. what is the least costly way of encoding all of these words as well as the archaic form "hause"? what is 
its cost? 

cost: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(m) minimum spelling trees (3/3) 

m3. there can be several ways to encode the same set of words. two ways to encode a set of words are 
considered different if any word in the set is encoded based on different words in the two ways. for exam-
ple, if the set of words is {a, b, c}, one way to encode c is based on a and another way to encode c is 
based on b. because c is encoded based on different words, these two ways are different. how many differ-
ent ways are there to encode the five forms of haus with a cost less than 12? 

 

 

 

 

m4. a computer manufacturer just figured out that it will make more money if more memory is required! 
they ask you: what's the greatest cost encoding of the five forms of haus? what is its cost? 

cost: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

