(g) zoink! (1/2) 

as everyone who needs to buy sprockets online knows, the crowd-sourced website zoink! is the place to go 
to get real evaluations from real users on real sprockets. you might have the most optaxic sprocket out 
there, but unless it   s getting reviewed on zoink! nobody   s going to hear about it. 
 
to ensure quality, the administrators of zoink! have to continuously delete reviews written by bots, small 
software programs that pretend to be human reviewers. the admins can   t read every review by hand so they 
first need to pre-filter obvious garbage. thankfully, one common mistake bots make is in using multiple adjec-
tives that describe different degrees of a quality in an improper way. (you can think of the adjectives on a 
scale of intensity, with different scales for different qualities from low intensity to high intensity.) there are 
correct and incorrect ways of using such    scalar    adjectives when describing sprockets. for example, the 
phrase:  
 
       good but not great (correct)  
 
is perfectly acceptable and should be marked as such. but this phrase: 
 
        furious but not angry (wrong) 
 
makes no sense since furious is stronger that angry and therefor strictly subsumes angry - you can be angry 
but not so much as to be furious, but you cannot be furious and not be angry. any review containing this 
phrase should be thrown away immediately since it definitely came from a bot rather than a human speaker. 
 
there are also some unclear cases. this phrase: 
 
         furious but not good (maybe) 
 
seems odd since it compares two adjectives from different scales (anger and goodness). such a review should 
raise a red flag but be inspected more closely before being thrown out. 
 
oh but the sprocket marketplace is incredibly hip and so everyone writes using the latest slang. in order to 
write filtering software, the zoink! admins (who are not so hip) first looked at a bunch of snippets from re-
views written by real people. here they are: 

1.  cromulent but not melaxious  

7. 

not only quarmic, but nistrotic   13.  not nistrotic, just tamacious  

2.  not only efrimious but quarmic   8. 

shtingly, though not efrimious   14.  wilky but not daxic  

3.  not only hyxilious but fligranish   9. 

not tamacious, just efrimious  

15.  not daxic, just jaronic  

4.  not only daxic but fligranish  

10.  not optaxic, just fligranish  

16.  jaronic but not hyxilious  

5.  not laxaraptic, but just hyxilious   11.  not only cromulent but shtingly   17.  laxaraptic but not optaxic  

6.  not just melaxious but efrimious   12.  not nistrotic, but just efrimious    

 

(g) zoink! (2/2) 

based on these snippets, the admins were able to understand how the different properties are connected so 
they were ready to decide whether further snippets were 
     correct, i.e. they might easily have been written by humans 
     wrong, i.e. they must have been written by bots  
     maybe, i.e. they might have been written by humans or by bots because they combine points on different 

scales.   

 
here is a selection of the further snippets: 

a.  not only hyxilious but quarmic  

b. 

jaronic but not laxaraptic  

c.  cromulent but not nistrotic  

d.  not only tamacious, but melaxious  

e.  not only shtingly but quarmic  

f.  not fligranish, just wilky  

g.  optaxic but not hyxilious  

h.  cromulent but not jaronic  

i.  not just optaxic but nistrotic  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
g1. can you figure out which of the snippets a-i belong to which category below?  
 
 
 
 

a. correct (4 snippets) 
b. wrong (2 snippets) 
c. maybe (3 snippets) 

correct 

 

 

 

wrong 

 

 

 

maybe 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

