do not scan this page 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(f) grammar rules! (1/3) [10 points] 

 

 

 

v     eat 

s     n v 

v     sing 

n     squirrels  

n     children   

one way for computers to understand language is by parsing sentences to figure out the role of each word. 
a id18 (id18) (also called phrase structure grammar) is a set of rules for forming sentences. 
only sentences that can be generated using such a set of rules are then deemed grammatically correct and 
   well-formed   .  computer scientists and linguists use id18s to define and parse languages, where a    language    
is defined as any and all sentences that a given id18 can generate. s is the starting symbol for each sentence.  
 
the following rules make up a simple id18: 
 
 
 
 
 
each rule says that the element to the left of the arrow can be expanded into the elements to the right of the 
arrow.  by repeatedly replacing symbols, this id18 can expand the symbol s into    squirrels sing   ,    children 
sing   ,    squirrels eat   , and    children eat   .  it cannot, however, generate    children eat squirrels    or    squirrels 
eat children    or just    children        you can see that there is no possible sequence of replacements that turns s 
into any of these. 
 
the following is another simple id18. the rules have been numbered for your convenience, but the numbers 
are not part of the rules.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13. np     np conj np 

6. vp      vp conj vp 

19. tv     catches 

28. vp     tv c s 

20. conj     and 

25. vp     tv np 

10. n     squirrel 

11. tv     chases 

21. vp     iv pp 

2. vp     vp pp 

7. pp     p np  

15. tv     eats  

18. n     john  

22. n     mary  

23. tv     tells  

26. n     dog   

29. n     tree   

27. tv     sees 

1. s     np vp 

9. np     d n 

16. p     away 

5. np     n   

17. vp     iv   

30. iv     sits 

4. iv     runs 

24. d     the 

8. c     that 

14. n     he 

12. p     in 

3. pp     p 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(f) grammar rules! (2/3) 

a. john sees the dog and mary sees the dog.   
 
b. the dog sees john and mary.  

c. the dog sees a squirrel. 
 
d. the squirrel sits in the tree.  
 
e. that squirrel sees the dog. 
 
f. the squirrel was seen by the dog. 
 
g. the dog runs. 
 
h. the squirrel in the tree runs. 
 
i. the dog chases the squirrel and eats the squirrel. 

f1. here is a simple story.  several of the following sentences are, according to the above id18, not well 
formed, meaning they cannot be derived from s by repeated substitution of symbols.  list the sentences that 
the id18 above can generate in the box below; ignore the periods. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  m. the dog sees that john sees that he eats the squirrel. 
 
  n. and the dog runs away. 
 
  o. mary and john chase the dog. 
 
 
 
  q. john eats dog. 
 
 

j. the dog eats. 
 
k. john sees that the dog eats the squirrel. 
 
l. john tells mary that the dog eats the squirrel. 
 

 
p. john chases and catches the dog. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(f) grammar rules! (3/3) 

f2. not all of the sentences that this id18 can generate are actually sentences of english.  for example,    the 
dog and the squirrel sits    can be generated but this isn   t a correct sentence of english. 
 
give three more examples of sentences that can be generated by this id18 but are not correct english sen-
tences; enter one word per box. skip the periods at the end of the sentences.  

a.   

 

 

b. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
f3. one of the rules in the id18 above is redundant: any sentence that can be generated using this rule can 
already be generated by a combination of other rules.  write the number of the redundant rule below.  
 
 
 
 

 

