your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(l) yesbot (1/2) [10 points] 

the introduction of the yesbot onto the corporate scene has revolutionized upper management across the 
nation.  cost-savvy ceos have saved billions in salaries by replacing expensive vice presidents and board 
members with yesbots, guaranteed to agree with everything the ceo has said. 

    

    

    

    

    

    

   george from accounting has released a factual earnings report!    
   yes, sir or ma   am, it is true that george from accounting has released a factual earnings report.    

   it will be the downfall of the company!    
   yes, sir or ma   am, it is true that it will be the downfall of the company.    

   the press will have a field day!    
   yes, sir or ma   am, it is true that the press will have a field day.    

although shiny and impressive-looking, the yesbot is not very smart     in fact, it resembles the very first com-
puter programs to attempt to communicate with humans.  these systems (such as eliza)    pretended    to un-
derstand the human input and operated on the following principle: for a specific input pattern they generated 
an output pattern from a set of patterns they could choose from. 

the original yesbot had only one pattern: when a yesbot hears its owner make a statement (as opposed to a 
question, command, request, etc.), it says    yes, sir or ma   am, it is true that...    and then repeats whatever its 
owner just said. 

but reports started coming in that the yesbots were making mistakes left and right, telling lies and formulat-
ing untruths (where    true    means, of course, whatever the owner believes).  the yesbots are quickly re-
called and engineers attempt to figure out what went wrong. 

 

 

l1. give an example of a sentence that, when said by the ceo, will cause yesbot to make a mistake. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(l) yesbot (2/2) 

l2. provide two examples of words that, when the ceo uses them in a sentence, will sometimes cause 
yesbot to make a mistake, but sometimes won   t.  explain why.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

l3. are there any words that will always cause yesbot to make a mistake, (that is, say a lie) any time the 
ceo uses them?  list any you can, and explain why or why not. 

 

 

