your name:                                                                                        registration # 
 

c. interstellar first contact (1/2) 

[10 points] 

it's hard enough to translate between languages when you understand both languages.  it's harder still when you only 
understand one.  but what do computers do?  they don't truly understand either language.  to illustrate the challenge 
that computers face, kevin knight posed this classic puzzle (knight 1997): given two equivalent texts in two unknown 
alien languages, how would you go about translating one to another? 
 
it is the year 2354 ad.  our scientists have been eavesdropping on messages between two alien civilizations 
for a very long time, but we have never met either.  the closest aliens, the centauri, have finally begun to 
communicate with us.  their first message was a message of peace,    farok crrok hihok yorok clok kantok ok
-yurp.    
 
now, we know that the centauri have been in contact for some time with the arcturan race, who live in an-
other solar system.  we have never had contact with the arcturans, but newly developed technology makes 
it possible for us to send them a message.  we would like to send them, first, a message of peace, but be-
cause we do not understand their language, this is not an easy task. 
 
luckily, we have intercepted communications from the centauri that include both languages.  here are 12 
sentences in centauri and their 12 translations in arcturan.  unfortunately, because we have only been 
eavesdropping, their meaning is unknown.  however, we do know that the sentence pairs on each line are 
translations of each other.  we want to use this information to translate the original peace message from the 
centauri and then send this to the arcturans.  your assignment will be to do this translation. 
 
 
 
 

ok-voon ororok sprok.   

at-voon bichat dat.  

arcturan 

centauri 

ok-drubel ok-voon anok plok sprok.                           

at-drubel at-voon pippat rrat dat. 

 

erok sprok izok hihok ghirok.  

ok-voon anok drok brok jok.  

wiwok farok izok stok. 

lalok sprok izok jok stok. 

totat dat arrat vat hilat.  

at-voon krat pippat sat lat. 

totat jjat quat cat.  

wat dat krat quat cat.  

lalok farok ororok lalok sprok izok enemok. 

wat jjat bichat wat dat vat eneat.  

lalok brok anok plok nok. 

iat lat pippat rrat nnat. 

wiwok nok izok kantok ok-yurp.  

totat nnat quat oloat at-yurp. 

lalok mok nok yorok ghirok clok. 

wat nnat gat mat bat hilat. 

lalok nok crrok hihok yorok zanzanok.  

wat nnat arrat mat zanzanat.  

lalok rarok nok izok hihok mok.            

wat nnat forat arrat vat gat. 

your name:                                                                                       registration # 
 

c. interstellar first contact (2/2) 

clok 

hihok 

farok  

yorok  

c-1  let's start with the first centauri word:    farok   .  this word occurs in two of our centauri sentences.  
given that these sentences' arcturan translations only have one word in common with each other, we can 
assume that this word is the translation for    farok   .  which word it is? 
 
 
 
 
c-2  do the same thing for    hihok    and    yorok   .  for    yorok    you will need to make some assumptions 
about word ordering. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c-3  the centauri word    clok    only occurs once.  however, you can figure out its arcturan translation in 
another way. 
 
 
 
 
c-4  try to use the processes from the previous assignments to complete as much as possible of the follow-
ing table.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c-5  complete the translation of    farok crrok hihok yorok clok kantok ok-yurp.     keep in mind that cen-
tauri and arcturan sentences can have a different word order.  there may be more than one correct reply. 
 
 
 
 
 
c-6  after some years a reply message is received in arcturan.  it reads,    totat nnat forat arrat mat bat.     
translate this message into centauri.  there may be more than one correct reply. 
 
 

ok-yurp 

kantok 

crrok 

