your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(n)  a tree by any other name (1/2) [10 points] 

a decision tree consists of a pivot word, a positive branch, and a negative branch. each branch has either a 
decision tree or a final word.  a decision tree is applied to a set of words called a context. if a context con-
tains the pivot word (anywhere), then the positive branch is followed.  if the context does not, the negative 
branch is followed.  when a final word is reached, the tree has classified the context. id90 are used 
to predict words based on their contexts, and they're useful in automatic text processing applications.  
 
for instance, to classify which main verb is used in each phrasal verbs below, based on its context of parti-
cles, we could use the following decision tree. 
 
take back 
take up with 
take to 
go back on 
go up to 
 
 
 
 
n1. the depth of a tree is the most number of words on a path to any final word. the depth of the example 
tree above is 3 (up, back, on). draw the decision tree of least depth that correctly classifies the main verbs 
{call, check, come} in the following phrasal verbs, based only on their particles {across, as, down, in, on, out, 
to, up, with}. 
 
call down to 
call out to 
check in on 
check up on 
come across as 
come down with 
come on to 
come out with 
come up with 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(n)  a tree by any other name (2/2) 

n2. the size of a tree is the number of final words it contains. the size of the example tree above is 5. draw 
the smallest decision tree that distinguishes between "on" and "up" following "hold" in these excerpts from 
shakespeare, using any words in the surrounding sentences as context. 
 
does he not hold up his head, as it were, and strut in his gait? 
must have a word anon. lay hold on him. 
good people, enter, and lay hold on him. 
the law hath yet another hold on you. 
come hither, william; hold up your head; come. 
come on, sirrah; hold up your head; answer your master, be not afraid. 
lay hold on him, i charge you in the duke's name. 
with her whom here i cannot hold on shore ; 
away, i say; time wears: hold up your head, and mince. 
like hold on thee. let go his arm. 
who twice a day their wither'd hands hold up. 
canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes a while, 

