your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(10 points) 

(m) word salad (1/3) 

charlie and jane had been passing notes in class, when suddenly their teacher mr. johnson saw what was 
going on.  he rushed to the back of the class, took the note charlie had just passed jane, and ripped it up, 
dropping the pieces on the floor.  jane noticed that he had managed to rip each word of the message onto a 
separate piece of paper.  the pieces of paper were, in alphabetical order, as follows: 
 

     dog 

    

    

in 

is 

     my 

    

    

school 

the 

 
 
 
m1.  a.  most likely, what did charlie's note originally say? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

c.  explain for each alternative why it is less likely than your first suggestion. 

b.  give two alternative grammatical sentences also formed from all of the words on charlie   s note. 

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(m) word salad (2/3) 

in the previous example, jane could figure out pretty easily what charlie had intended.  but they 
weren   t always so lucky!  the next day, jane asked charlie who had won the big football game the 
previous night between their school and jefferson high.  charlie wrote jane a note with the answer, 
but mr. johnson caught it and tore it up again.  jane picked up the pieces, but discovered that she still 
had no idea who won.  what did charlie write? 

m2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
m3.  a few days later, charlie and jane are at it again.  jane asks charlie what he thought of a recent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

movie, and he responds by writing a long paragraph   but once again, mr. johnson intercepts the note, 
and tears it apart into separate words.  this time, mr. johnson, tired of the game, swept away the 
pieces before jane could even see all of them. 

and avoid awful but cardboard cool dialogue does effects for lack no not originality plague 
pretty risible utter 

here are the words jane did manage to see, in alphabetical order: 

can jane still tell what charlie thought of the movie?  how? 

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(m) word salad (3/3) 

m4.  the next day, charlie describes to jane a different movie with a one-sentence review.  mr. johnson 
intercepts it and shreds it again, and jane recovers all the pieces.  but she is stymied   she can't tell 
 
whether charlie liked it or disliked it.  here are the words she found   what are two possible 
 
 
grammatical sentences charlie might have intended, having opposite meanings? 
 

     bad 

     dialogue 

     effects 

    

and 

     not 

    

    

    

    

special 

the 

the 

thrilling 

     was 

     were 

 

 

