your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                         

 

(10 points) 

(d) huevos y pimientos (1/2) 

paula went shopping while her mother was sick in bed. the only items that paula had to buy were (according 
to her mother's instructions) "red peppers and cucumbers". on the way to the corner store, paula thought 
more about her shopping order. it was clear that the peppers had to be red while the cucumbers didn't have 
to be red (after all, paula didn't think that red cucumbers existed). paula imagined what she would have had 
to do if her mom had sent her to buy "red peppers and grapefruit". in that case, she thought, maybe she 
would have to make sure that the grapefruit were red as well. or maybe not... paula was confused. 
 
in linguistics, the problem pondered by paula is called "attachment ambiguity". does the adjective ("red") at-
tach to (describe) the nearest noun ("peppers") only or does it attach to the entire noun phrase "peppers 
and cucumbers")? in some cases, world knowledge can help. we agree with paula that cucumbers cannot be 
red so one of the possible interpretations of "red peppers and cucumbers" is actually unlikely.  in other cases, 
e.g., "old boys and girls", both interpretations ("old boys and old girls" and "old boys and girls of any age") are 
reasonable. 
 
paula's best friend, cecilia, speaks spanish at home. cecilia and paula often help each other with homework 
or with household chores. on her way to the store, paula ran into cecilia and wanted to tell her about the 
linguistic problem that was on her mind. she remembered the spanish words for "red" ("rojos" in plural) , 
"peppers" ("pimientos"), "and" ("y"), "cucumbers" ("pepinos"), and "grapefruit" ("pomelos" in plural) and also 
remembered that in spanish the adjective comes after the noun that it describes (e.g., "pomelos rojos", liter-
ally meaning "grapefruit (plural) red" or "ni  as peque  as" which literally translates as "girls small"). when she 
told cecilia that she was on her way to buy some "pimientos y pepinos rojos" ("peppers and cucumbers 
red"), cecilia started to laugh. paula realized that in her spanish translation, not only did the cucumbers now 
appear to be red but it was now also unclear whether the peppers themselves had to be red.  

d1.  how could paula translate each of the following phrases into spanish and  preserve all ambiguities        
           (   uncertainties   ) as well as all certainties present in their english versions? (4 points) 
 
a. red peppers and cucumbers (give two distinct answers that work    one per line) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

            b. red peppers and grapefruit (give one answer) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
d2.  a very popular children's book by dr. seuss is called "green eggs and ham". ignoring the actual  
 
 
 
          a. the eggs are unambiguously green (t/f) 
 
          b. the ham is unambiguously green (t/f) 
 

contents of the book, can you determine based solely on the book   s title whether these statements 
are true. (2 points each) 
 

 

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                         

 

(10 points) 

(d) huevos y pimientos (2/2) 

how would you translate the title of the book into spanish (again disregard the actual translation, if 
you happen to know it) in order to preserve any ambiguities and certainties present in the english  
title? 

ham = jam  n 
eggs = huevos 
green (plural) = verdes 

d3.  consider the following translations from english into spanish. (3 points) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             via automata intersection.  in proceedings of aaai 2000. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

this problem is based on the following paper:  kevin knight and irene langkilde. preserving ambiguities in generation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

