categorial grammar

mark steedman

university of edinburgh

abstract

categorial grammar comprises a family of lexicalized theories of
grammar characterized by very tight coupling of syntactic derivation and
semantic composition, having their origin in the work of frege. some ver-
sions of cg have extremely restricted expressive power, corresponding to
the smallest known natural family of formal languages that properly in-
cludes the context-free. nevertheless, they are also strongly adequate to
the capture of a wide range of cross-linguistically attested non-context-
free constructions. for these reasons, categorial grammars have been quite
widely applied, not only to linguistic analysis of challenging phenomena
such as coordination and unbounded dependency, but to computational lin-
guistics and psycholinguistic modeling.

1. introduction. categorial grammar (cg) is a    strictly    lexicalized theory of
natural language grammar, in which the linear order of constituents and their interpre-
tation in the sentences of a language are entirely de   ned by the lexical entries for the
words that compose them, while a language-independent universal set of rules projects
the lexicon onto the strings and corresponding meanings of the language. many of
the key features of categorial grammar have over the years been assimilated by other
theoretical syntactic frameworks. in particular, there are recent signs of convergence
from the minimalist program within the transformational generative tradition (chom-
sky 1995; berwick and epstein 1995; cormack and smith 2005; boeckx 2008:250).

categorial grammars are widely used in various slightly different forms discussed
below by linguists interested in the relation between semantics and syntactic deriva-
tion. among them are computational linguists who for reasons of ef   ciency in practical
applications wish to keep that coupling as simple and direct as possible. categorial
grammars have been applied to the syntactic and semantic analysis of a wide variety
of constructions, including those involving unbounded dependencies, in a wide variety
of languages (e.g. moortgat 1988b; steele 1990; whitelock 1991; morrill and solias
1993; hoffman 1995; nishida 1996; kang 1995, 2002; bozs  ahin 1998, 2002; koma-
gata 1999; baldridge 1998, 2002; trechsel 2000; cha and lee 2000; park and cho
2000; c   ak  c   2005, 2009; ruangrajitpakorn et al. 2009; bittner 2011, 2014; kubota
2010; lee and tonhauser 2010; bekki 2010; tse and curran 2010).

categorial grammar is generally regarded as having its origin in frege   s remarkable
1879 begriffsschrift, which proposed and formalized the language that we now know as
   rst-order predicate logic (fopl) as a leibnizian calculus in terms of the combination
of functions and arguments, thereby laying the foundations of all modern logics and
programming languages, and opening up the possibility that natural language grammar
could be thought of in the same way. this possibility was investigated in its syntac-
tic and computational aspect for small fragments of natural language by ajdukiewicz
(1935) (who provided the basis for the modern notations), bar-hillel (1953) and bar-
hillel et al. (1964) (who gave categorial grammar its name), and lambek (1958) (who
initiated the type-logical interpretation of cg).

1

2

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

it was soon recognized that these original categorial grammars were context-free
(lyons 1968), and therefore unlikely to be adequately expressive for natural languages
(chomsky 1957), because of the existence of unbounded or otherwise    long range   
syntactic and semantic dependencies between elements such as those italicized in the
following examples:1

(1) a. these are the songs they say that the syrens sang.

b. the syrens sang and say that they wrote these songs.
c. some syren said that she had written each song.
d. every syren thinks that the sailors heard her.

(      /      )

frege   s challenge was taken up in categorial terms by geach (1970) (initiating the
combinatory generalization of cg), and montague (1970b) (initiating direct composi-
tionality, both discussed below) in particular, montague (1973) in   uentially developed
the    rst substantial categorial fragment of english combining syntactic analysis (us-
ing a version of ajdukiewicz    notation) with semantic composition in the tradition of
frege (using church   s    -calculus as a    glue language    to formalize the compositional
process).

in the latter paper, montague used a non-monotonic operation expressed in terms of
structural change to accomodate long range dependencies involved in quanti   er scope
alternation and pronoun-binding, illustrated in (1c,d). however, in 1970b he had laid
out a more ambitious program, according to which the relation between syntax and
semantics in all natural languages would be strictly homomorphic, like the syntax and
semantics in the model theory for a mathematical, logical, or programming language,
in the spirit of frege   s original program.

for example, the standard model theory for the language of    rst-order predicate logic
(fopl) has a small context-free set of syntactic rules, recursively de   ning the structure
of negated, conjunctive, quanti   ed, etc. clauses in terms of operators   ,    ,    x etc. and
their arguments. the semantic component then consists of a set of rules paired one-
to-one with the syntactic rules, compositionally de   ning truth of an expression of that
syntactic type solely in terms of truth of the arguments of the operator in question (see
robinson 1974).
two observations are in order when seeking to generalize such fregean systems as
fopl to human language. one is that the mechanism whereby an operator such as    x
   binds    a variable x in a term of the form    x[p] is not usually considered part of the
syntax of the logic. if it is treated syntactically, as has on occasion been proposed for
programming languages (aho 1968), then the syntax is in general no longer context-
free.2

the second obervation is that the syntactic structures of fopl can be thought of
in two distinct ways. one is as the syntax of the logic itself, and the other is as a
derivational structure describing a process by which an interpretations has been con-
structed. the most obvious context-free derivational structures are isomorphic to the
logical syntax, such as those which apply its rules directly to the analysis of the string,
either bottom-up or top-down. however, even for a context-free grammar, derivation
structure may be determined by a different    covering    syntax, such as a    normal form   

1 these constructions in english were shown by gazdar (1981) to be coverable with only context-free
resources in generalized phrase structure grammar (gpsg), whose    slash    notation for capturing such de-
pendencies is derived from but not equivalent to the categorial notation developed below. however, huybregts
(1984) and shieber (1985) proved chomsky   s widely accepted conjecture that in general such dependencies
require greater than cf expressive power.

2 this observation might be relevant to the analysis of    bound variable    pronouns like that in (1d).

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

3

grammar. (such covering grammars are sometimes used for compiling programming
languages, for reasons such as memory ef   ciency.) such covering derivations are ir-
relevant to interpretation, and do not count as a representational level of the language
itself. in considering different notions of structure involved in theories of natural lan-
guage grammar, it is important to be clear whether one is talking about logical syntax
or derivational structure.

recent work in categorial grammar has built on the fregeo-montagovian foundation
in two distinct directions, neither of which is entirely true to its origins. one group of
researchers has made its main priority capturing the semantics of diverse constructions
in natural languages using standard logics, often replacing montague   s structurally non-
monotone    quantifying in    operation by more obviously compositional rules or mem-
ory storage devices. its members have tended to either remain agnostic as to the syntac-
tic operations involved or assume some linguistically-endorsed syntactic theory such as
transformational grammar or gpsg (e.g. partee 1975; cooper 1983; szabolcsi 1997;
jacobson 1999; heim and kratzer 1998), sometimes using extended notions of scope
within otherwise standard logics (e.g. kamp and reyle 1993; groenendijk and stokhof
1991; ciardelli and roelofsen 2011), or tolerating a certain increase in complexity in
the form of otherwise syntactically or semantically unmotivated surface-compositional
syntactic operators or type-changing rules on the syntactic side (e.g. bach 1979; dowty
1982; hoeksema and janda 1988; jacobson 1992; hendriks 1993; barker 2002) and the
lambek tradition (e.g. lambek 1958, 2001; van benthem 1983, 1986; moortgat 1988a;
oehrle 1988; morrill 1994; carpenter 1995; bernardi 2002; casadio 2001; moot 2002;
grefenstette et al. 2011).

other post-montagovian approaches have sought to reduce syntactic complexity, at
the expense of expelling some apparently semantic phenomena from the logical lan-
guage entirely, particularly quanti   er scope alternation and pronominal binding, rele-
gating them to of   ine speci   cation of scopally underspeci   ed logical forms (e.g. kemp-
son and cormack 1981; reyle 1993; poesio 1995; koller and thater 2006; pollard
1984), or extragrammatical discourse reference (e.g. webber 1978; bosch 1983)

one reason for this diversity and divergence within the broad church of categorial
grammar is that the long-range and/or unbounded dependencies exempli   ed in (1)
above, which provide the central challenge for any theory of grammar and for the
fregean approach in particular, fall into three distinct groups. relativization, topicaliza-
tion, and right node-raising are clearly unbounded and clearly syntactic, being subject
to strong island constraints, such as the       xed subject constraint   , as in (2a).

(2) a. #this is the syren they wonder whether sang a song.

b. some syren claimed that each song was the best.
c. every syren claimed that some song was the best.
d. every syren thinks that her song is the best.

(      /#      )
(      /      )

on the other hand, the binding of pronouns and other nominals as dependents of quan-
ti   ers is equally clearly completely insensitive to islands, as in (2d), while quanti   er
scope inversion is a mixed phenomenon, with the universals every and each apparently
unable to invert scope out of embedded subject positions, as in (2b), while the existen-
tials can do so (2c).

the linguistic literature in general is con   icted on the precise details of what species
of dependency and scope is allowed where. however, there is general agreement that
while syntactic long-range dependencies are mostly nested, and the occasions when
crossing dependencies are allowed are very narrowly speci   ed syntactically, intrasen-
tential binding of pronouns and dependent existentials is essentially free within the

4

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

scope of the operator. for example, crossing and nesting binding dependencies in the
following seem equally good:

(3) every sailori knows that every syren j thinks she j/hei saw himi /her j.

it follows that those researchers whose primary concern is with pronoun binding in
semantics tend to de   ne their fregean theory of grammar in terms of different sets
of combinatory operators from those researchers whose primary concern is syntactic
dependency. thus, not all categorial theories discussed below are commensurable.

2. pure categorial grammars. in all varieties of categorial grammar, ele-
ments like verbs are associated with a syntactic    category    which identi   es them as
fregean functions, and speci   es the type and directionality of their arguments and the
type of their result. we here use the    result leftmost    notation in which a rightward-
combining functor over a domain    into a range    are written   /   , while the corre-
sponding leftward-combining functor is written   \   .3

   and    may themselves be function categories. for example, a transitive verb is a
function from (object) nps into predicates   that is, into functions from (subject) nps
into s:

(4) likes := (s\np)/np

all varieties of categorial grammar also include the following rules for combining

forward- and backward   looking functions with their arguments:

(5) forward application: (>)

x/y y     x

(6) backward application: (<)

y x\y     x

these rules have the form of very general binary phrase-structure rule schemata. in
fact, pure categorial grammar is just context-free grammar written in the accepting,
rather than the producing, direction, with a consequent transfer of the major burden
of specifying particular grammars from the ps rules to the lexicon. while it is now
convenient to write derivations as in a, below, they are equivalent to conventional phrase
structure derivations b:

(7) a. mary

likes

bureaucracy

b.

np (s\np)/np

np

>

s\np

<

s

it is important to note that such tree-structures are simply a representation of the process
of derivation. they do not necessarily constitute a level of representation in the formal
grammar.

cg categories can be regarded as encoding the semantic type of their translation,
and this translation can be made explicit in the following expanded notation, which
associates a logical form with the entire syntactic category, via the colon operator, which
is assumed to have lower precedence than the categorial slash operators. (agreement

3 there is an alternative    result on top    notation due to lambek (1958), according to which the latter
category is written   \  . lambek   s notation has advantages of readability in the context-free case, because
all application is adjacent cancellation. however, this advantage does not hold for trans   context-free theories
which include non-lambek operators such as crossed composition. for such grammars, and for any analysis
in which the semantics has to be kept track of, the lambek notation is confusing, because it does not assign
a consistent left-right position to the result    vs. the argument    .

npvnpvpsmarylikesbureaucracyc a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

5

features are also included in the syntactic category, represented as subscripts, much as
in bach 1983. the feature 3s is    underspeci   ed    for gender and can combine with the
more speci   ed 3sm by a standard uni   cation mechanism that we will pass over here   
cf. shieber 1986.)4

(8) likes := (s\np3s)/np :    x   y.likes(cid:48)xy

we must also expand the rules of functional application in the same way:

(9) forward application: (>)

x/y : f y : a     x : f a
(10) backward application: (<)

y : a x\y : f     x : f a
they yield derivations like the following:

(11)

mary

likes

bureaucracy

np3sm : mary(cid:48) (s\np3s)/np : likes(cid:48) np : bureaucracy(cid:48)

s\np3s : likes(cid:48)bureaucracy(cid:48)

s : likes(cid:48)bureaucracy(cid:48)mary

>

<

the derivation yields an s with a compositional interpretation, equivalent under a con-
vention of left associativity to (likes(cid:48)bureaucracy(cid:48))mary(cid:48).

coordination can be included in cg via the following category, allowing constituents

of like type to conjoin to yield a single constituent of the same type:5

(12) and := (x\x)/x

since x is a variable over any type, and all three xs must unify with the same type, it
allows derivations like the following.

(13)

detest

i
np (s\np)/np (x\x)/x

and

oppose

(s\np)/np

((s\np)/np)\((s\np)/np)

>

bureaucracy

np

>

<

<

(s\np)/np

s\np

s

3. id35. in order to allow coordination of
contiguous strings that do not constitute constituents, id35 allows certain further oper-
ations on functions and arguments related to curry   s combinators b, t, and s, (curry
and feys 1958).

3.1. function composition b. functions may not only apply to arguments, but
also compose with other functions, under the following rule,    rst proposed in modern

4 another notation, more in the spirit of prolog-style uni   cation-based formalisms like lexical functional
grammar (lfg) and head-driven phrase structure grammar (hpsg) associates a uni   able logical form
with each primitive category, so that the same transitive verb might appear as follows (cf. uszkoreit 1986;
karttunen 1989; bouma and van noord 1994; zeevat 1988):

(i) likes := (s : likes(cid:48)y x\np3s : x)/np : y

the advantage is that the predicate-argument structure is built directly by uni   cation with x and y in rules
like (5) and (6), which need no further modi   cation to apply (cf. pereira and shieber 1987). otherwise, the
choice is largely a matter of notational convenience.

5 the semantics of this category, or rather category schema, is given by partee and rooth (1983), and
is omitted here as a distraction. we will come to certain restrictions on the combinatory potential of this
category below.

6

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

terms in ades and steedman 1982 but with antecedents in geach (1970) and as a theo-
rem of lambek 1958:

(14) forward composition: (> b)

x/y y /z     x/z

the most important single property of combinatory rules like this is that their semantics
is completely determined under the following principle:

(15) the principle of combinatory transparency: the semantic interpretation of
the category resulting from a combinatory rule is uniquely determined by the
interpretation of the slash in a category as a mapping between two sets.

in the above case, the category x/y is a mapping of y into x and the category y/z is
that of a mapping from z into y . since the two occurrences of y identify the same set,
the result category x/z is that mapping from z to x which constitutes the composition
of the input functions. it follows that the only semantics that we are allowed to assign,
when the rule is written in full, is as follows:

(16) forward composition: (>b)

x/y : f y /z : g     x/z :    x. f (gx)

no other interpretation is allowed.6

the operation of this rightward composition rule in derivations is indicated by an
underline indexed >b (because curry called his composition combinator b). its ef-
fect can be seen in the derivation of sentences like i detest, and will oppose, bureau-
cracy, which crucially involves the composition of two verbs to yield a composite of
the same category as a transitive verb (the rest of the derivation is given in the sim-
pler notation). it is important to observe that composition also yields an appropriate
interpretation for the composite verb will oppose, as    x.   y.will(cid:48)(oppose(cid:48) x) y, a cate-
gory which if applied to an object bureaucracy and a subject i yields the proposition
will(cid:48)(oppose(cid:48) bureaucracy(cid:48)) me(cid:48). the coordination will therefore yield an appropriate
semantic interpretation.7
detest

oppose

(17)

and

will

i
np (s\np)/np (x\x)/x (s\np)/vp : will(cid:48) vp/np : oppose(cid:48)
(s\np)/np :    x.   y.will(cid:48)(oppose(cid:48)x)y
<  >
(s\np)/np

>b

bureaucracy

np

>

s\np

s

<

3.2. type-raising t. combinatory grammars also include type-raising rules,
originally proposed in steedman 1985 but with antecedents in generalized quanti   er
theory, which turn arguments into functions over functions-over-such-arguments. these
rules allow arguments to compose, and thereby take part in coordinations like i detest,
and mary likes, bureaucracy. for example, the following rule allows the conjuncts to
form as below (again, the remainder of the derivation is given in the briefer notation):

(18) subject type-raising: (>t)

np : a     s/(s\np) :    f . f a

6 this principle would follow automatically if we were using the alternative uni   cation-based notation

discussed in note 4 and the composition rule as as it is given in 14.

7 the analysis compresses two applications into a single coordination step labeled <   >, and begs some

syntactic and semantic questions about the interpretation of modals.

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

7

detest

and

(s\np)/np (x\x)/x

(19)

i
np

s/(s\np)

>t

mary
np
: mary(cid:48)
s/(s\np)
:    f .f mary(cid:48)

>t

s/np

>b

likes

(s\np)/np
:    x.   y.likes(cid:48)xy

bureaucracy

np

s/np

:    x.likes(cid:48)x mary(cid:48)

s/np

>b

<  >

s

>

rule 18 has an    order-preserving    property. that is, it turns the np into a rightward
looking function over leftward function, and therefore preserves the linear order of
subjects and predicates speci   ed in the lexicon for the language.

like composition, type-raising rules are required by the principle of combinatory
transparency (15) to be transparent to semantics. this fact ensures that the raised
subject np has an appropriate interpretation, and can compose with the verb to produce
a function that can either coordinate with another nonstandard constituent of the same
type or reduce with an object bureaucracy to yield likes    bureaucracy    mary    via a
nonstandard left-branching alternative derivation to (11), delivering the same logical
form.

the latter alternative derivational structures are sometimes misleadingly referred to
as    spuriously    ambiguous (karttunen 1989), and deprecated as exacerbating the search
problem for the parser. however, any theory of grammar that covers the same range of
coordination phenomena will engender the same degree of nondeterminism in deriva-
tion. we return to this question in section 7.

while other solutions to the problem of getting subjects to combine with the tran-
sitive verb can readily be imagined, the inclusion of order-preserving type-raising is
essential to the account of coordination afforded by id35, because it allows sequences
of arguments to compose. we defer discussion of this question until section 3.6, where
we will see that type-raising should be constrained as an essentially lexical operation,
identi   able with the traditional notion of case, whether morphologically marked, as in
latin and japanese, or positionally marked or    structural   , as in english.

3.3. substitution s. for reasons that we will come to directly, the following rule
of a type closely related to composition,    rst proposed by szabolcsi (1983, 1992) under
the name    connection   , and discussed at length in steedman 1987, is required for the
analysis of the parasitic gap construction, illustrated in (21):
(x\y )/z : f     x/y :    x.( f x)(gx)

(20) backward crossed substitution: (<s)

y/z : g

(21) i will [[burn]vp/np [without reading](vp\vp)/np]vp/np [any report longer than

100 pages]np

3.4. the space of possible combinatory rules in id35. rule (20) is of
interest for exploiting all and only the degrees of freedom that are available under the
following universal syntactic projection principles (the term    principal functor    refers
to the input functor whose range is the same as the range of the output   in the notation
used above, the functor whose range is x):

8

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

(22) the principle of directional consistency

the inputs to a combinatory rule must be directionally consistent with the
principal functor   if the latter applies to the result of the subordinate fuctor
to the left, it must be rightmost of the inputs, and vice versa.

(23) the principle of directional inheritance

the argument(s) in a function that is the output of a combinatory rule must
be directionally consistent with the corresponding argument(s) in the input
functors   if an argument of the output bears a slash of a given directionality,
all occurrences of that argument in the inputs must bear a slash of the same
directionality.

these rules are pefectly illustrated by szabolcsi   s rule (20): although the the inputs bear
different    crossing    directionality (which is allowed), the principal functor (x\y)/z is
looking for the result y of the subordinate functor y/z to its left, so it is rightmost
(consistency), and the argument z of the output x/z bears a rightward slash in both
inputs (inheritance).

the lexical type-raising rules are limited by these principles to the order preserving
cases (30) and (31): raised categories which change word order, such as topics and the
relative pronouns discussed in the next section, have to change the result type.

3.5. extraction. since complement-taking verbs like think, vp/s, can in turn
compose with fragments like mary likes, s/np, we correctly predict that right-node
raising is unbounded, as in a, below, and also provide the basis for an analyis of the
similarly unbounded character of leftward extraction, as in b:8

(24) a. [

b. the bureaucracyn [

[i detest]s/np and [you think mary likes]s/np ]s/np [bureaucracy.]np
[that](n\n)/(s/np) [you think mary likes]s/np ]n\n
[any

[sieze]vp/np and [burn without reading]vp/np

]vp/np

(25) a. i will [

report longer than 100 pages.]np

b. the reportsn [

[that](n\n)/(s/np) [i will burn without reading]s/np ]n\n
3.6. coordination. this apparatus has been applied to a wide variety of coor-
dination phenomena, including    argument-cluster coordination   ,    backward gapping   
and    verb-raising    constructions in a variety of languages by the authors listed in the
introduction. the    rst of these is relevant to the present discussion, and is illustrated by
the following analysis, from dowty (1988, cf. steedman 1985):9

(26)

introduce
to george
(vp/pp)/np (vp/pp)\((vp/pp)/np) vp\(vp/pp) (x\x)/x vp\((vp/pp)/np)

to sue

harry

bill

and

<t

<t

<b

vp\((vp/pp)/np)

<b

vp\((vp/pp)/np)

vp

<  >

<

the important feature of this analysis is that it uses    backward    rules of type-raising
<t and composition <b that are the exact mirror-image of the two    forward    ver-
sions introduced as examples 14 and 18, which similarly guarantee that the semantics
of nonstandard constituents like bill to sue is such as to reduce appropriately with a

8 see the earlier papers and steedman (1996, 2000a) for details, including ecp effects and other extraction
asymmetries, and the involvement of similar apparently non-constituent fragments in intonational phrasing.
9 in more recent work, dowty has disowned this analysis, on the ground that it makes an    intrinsic    use of
logical form to account for binding phenomena. this issue is discussed further in dowty 1997 and steedman
1996, and more brie   y below.

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

9

ditransitive verb like give. it is in fact a prediction of the theory that such a construction
can exist in english, and its inclusion in the grammar requires no additional mechanism
whatsoever.

the earlier papers show that no other non-constituent coordinations of dative-
accusative np sequences are allowed in any language with the english verb categories,
given the assumptions of id35. thus the following are ruled out in principle, rather than
by stipulation:

(27) a. *bill to sue and introduce harry to george
b. *introduce to sue bill and to george harry

in english the phenomenon shows up in all constructions that can be assumed to involve
multiple arguments of the same functor:10

(28) a. i introduced bob to carol, and ted to alice.

b. i saw thelma yesterday, and louise the day before.
c. will gilbert arrive and george leave?
d. i persuaded warren to take a bath and dexter to wash his socks.
e. i promised mutt to go to the movies and jeff to go to the play.
f. i told shem i lived in edinburgh and shaun i lived in philadelphia.
g. i bet sammy sixpence he would win and rosie a dollar she would lose.
h. i like ike and you, adlai.

a number of related well-known cross-linguistic generalizations    rst noted by ross
(1970) concerning the dependency of so-called    gapping    upon lexical word-order are
also captured (see dowty (1988) and steedman (1985, 1990, 2000b)). the pattern is
that in languages whose basic clause constituent order subject-verb-object (svo), the
verb or verb group that goes missing is the one in the right conjunct, and not the one in
the left conjunct. the same asymmetry holds for vso languages like irish. however,
sov languages like japanese show the opposite asymmetry:
the missing verb is in
the left conjunct.11 the pattern can be summarized as follows for the three dominant
constituent orders (asterisks indicate the excluded cases):12

(29) svo: *so and svo svo and so
vso: *so and vso vso and so
sov: so and sov *sov and so

this observation can be generalized to individual constructions within a language: just
about any construction in which an element apparently goes missing preserves canoni-
cal word order in an analogous fashion: (26) above is an example of this generalization
holding of a verb-initial construction in english.

phenomena like the above immediately suggest that all complements of verbs bear
type-raised categories. however, we do not want anything else to type-raise. in partic-
ular, we do not want raised categories to raise again, or we risk in   nite regress in our
rules. one way to deal with this problem is to explicitly restrict the two type-raising
rules to the relevant arguments of verbs, as follows, a restriction that is a natural ex-
pression of the resemblance of type-raising to some generalized form of (nominative,
accusative, etc., morphological or structural) grammatical case   cf. steedman (1985,
1990).

10 this assumption precludes a small clause analysis of the basic constructions.
11 a number of apparent exceptions to ross   s generalization have been noted in the literature and are dis-
cussed in steedman 2000b. ross   s constraint is there stated in terms of overall order properties of languages
and constructions rather than any notion of    underlying    word order.

12 languages that order object before subject are suf   ciently rare as to apparently preclude a comparable

data set, although any result of this kind would be of immense interest.

10

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

(30) forward type-raising: (> t)
x : a     t/(t\x) :    f . f a
(31) backward type-raising: (< t)
x : a     t\(t/x) :    f . f a

the other solution is to simply expand the lexicon by incorporating of the raised
categories that these rules de   ne, so that categories like np have raised categories, and
all functions into such categories, like determiners, have the category of functions into
raised categories.

these two tactics are essentially equivalent, because in some cases we need both
raised and unraised categories for complements. (the argument depends upon the ob-
servation that any category that is not a barrier to extraction must bear an unraised
category, and any argument that can take part in argument-cluster coordination must be
raised   cf. dowty 2003). the correct solution from a linguistic point of view, inasfar
as it captures the fact that some languages appear to lack certain unraised categories
(notably pp and s(cid:48)), is probably the lexical solution. however the restricted rule-based
solution makes derivations easier to read and allows them to take up less space.

since categories like np can be raised over a number of different functor categories,
such as predicate, transitive verb, ditransitive verb etc, and since the resulting raised
categories s\(s/np), (s\np)\((s\np)/pp), etc. of nps, pps, etc are quite hard to
read, it is sometimes convenient to abbreviate the raised categories as a schema written
np   , pp   , etc.13

3.7. generalizing combinatory rules. a number of generalized forms of
the combinatory rules are allowed. we have already noted the need for crossed di-
rectionality in rules. thus for composition we have the following rule allowed under
principles (22) and (23)

(32) backward crossed composition: (>bx)
y /z : g x\y : f     x/z :    x. f (gx)

this rule allows    heavy np-shifted    examples like the following:

(33) i will [[go]vp/pp [next sunday]vp\vp]vp/pp [to london]pp

we also generalize all composition rules to higher valency in the subordinate input
function, to a small bound equal to the highest valency speci   ed in the lexicon, say     4,
thus:14

(34) backward crossed second-order composition: (<b2
x)

(y /z)/w : g x\y : f     (x/z)/w :    w   z. f (gwz)

such rules allow examples like the following, related to (33)

(35) i shall [[present](vp/pp)/np [next sunday]vp\vp]vp\vp [a prize]pp [to each

winner]pp

the inclusion of crossed second order composition in the theory of grammar allows
unbounded crossing dependency of the kind investigated in dutch and zurich german
by huybregts and shieber, and is the speci   c source of greater than cf power in id35.
the inclusion of crossed combinatory rules means that lexical items must be re-
stricted to avoid overgeneration in    xed word-order languages like english. for exam-

13 in computational implementations english type-raised categories are usually schematized in this way,
because its word order is suf   ciently rigid to allow the statistical parsing model to resolve the ambiguity
locally.

14 if there is no bound on n the expressive power of the system jumps to that of full indexed grammar

(srinivas 1997).

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

11

ple, while adverbial adjuncts can combine with verbs by crossed combination as above,
adnominal adjuncts cannot:

(36) *an [old]n/n [with a limp]n\n man

accordingly, we follow hepple (1990); morrill (1994); moortgat (1997), and more
speci   cally baldridge and kruijff (2003) in lexically distinguishing the slash-type of
english adnominals and their speci   ers as only allowed to combine by non-crossed
rules, writing them as follows:

(37) with := n\(cid:5)n

similarly, the coordination category (12) must be rewritten as follows, where the *
modality limits it to only combining via the application rules:

(38) and := (x\(cid:63)x)/(cid:63)x

this is managed using a simple type-lattice of features on slashes in categories and rules
due to baldridge, whose details we pass over here (see steedman and baldridge 2011).
3.8. free word-order. when dealing with the phenomenon of free order, it
may be convenient for some languages to represent some group of arguments of a head
as combining in any order to yield the same semantic result. following hoffman (1995)
and baldridge (2002), if three arguments a,b,c are completely free-order with respect
to a head yielding s, we might write its category as in (a) below. if it requires all three
to the left (right) in any order, we might write the category as in (b (c)). if the head
requires a to the left and the other arguments in any order to the right, we might write
the category as in (d):

(39) a. s{|a,|b,|c}
b. s{\a,\b,\c}
c. s{/a, /b, /c}
d. s{\a, /b, /c}

braces {. . .} enclose multisets of arguments that can be found in any order in the spec-
i   ed direction. the question then arises of how multisets behave under combinatory
rules such as composition.

it

baldridge points out
is crucial

to preserve the near context-free expressive power
the multiset notation as merely an abbrevia-
the ordered categories that would be required
(for example, s{\a,\b,\c} abbreviates the set

that,
of id35,
to interpret
tion for exhaustive listing of all
to support the speci   ed orders.
{((s\a)\b)\c, ((s\a)\c)\b, ((s\b)\a)\c, ((s\b)\c)\a, ((s\c)\a)\b, ((s\c)\b)\a}.)
the combinatory rules, such as the various forms of composition, must then be de-
   ned so that they preserve this interpretation, crucially involving the same limit of n     4
on the degree of generalized composition. again, we pass over the details here, but if
this constraint is not observed, then the expressive power of the grammar explodes to
that of full indexed grammars (cf. note 14).

hoyt and baldridge (2008) use composition as a unary rule to de   ne certain further
linguistically motivated combinatory species, notably those corresponding to curry   s d
combinator (wittenburg 1987). all of these rules obey the principles (22) and (23).

3.9. combinators and the theory of grammar. it is important for any
theory to keep its intrinsic degrees of freedom as low as possible with respect to the
degrees of freedom in the data it seeks to explain. in the case of the theory of grammar,
this means limiting the set of languages covered or generated to the smallest    natural
family of languages    that includes all and only the possible human languages. that set

12

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

is known to lie somewhere between the context-free and context-sensitive levels of the
id154. since most phenomena of natural language look context-free, the
lower end of that vast range is the region to aim for.

quite simple systems of combinators, including the typed bts system that under-
lies id35, are, in the absence of further restriction, equivalent to the simply typed    -
calculus   that is, to unconstrained recursively enumerable systems. it is the universal
restrictive    projection principles    (22) and (23), together with the restriction of gener-
alized composition bn and x in the coordination category schema (x\x)/x in (12) to
a bound on valency tentatively set at n     4, that crucially restricts the (weak) expressive
power of id35 to the same low level as tree-adjoining grammars (tag, joshi 1988)
and linear indexed grammars (lig, gazdar 1988) (vijay-shanker and weir 1994). this
level is the least more expressive natural family of languages that is known than context
free grammars.

this    nearly context-free    class is very much less expressive than the very properly
sub-context-sensitive    classes such as full indexed grammars (ig, aho 1968, 1969),
which can express    non-constant growth    languages like a2n, and full linear context-
free rewriting systems (lcfrs, weir 1988), also known as multiple context free gram-
mars (mid18). the latter are shown by kanazawa and salvati 2012 to include the total
scrambling language mix, and have been argued by stabler 2011 to characterize chom-
skian minimalist grammars.

a word is in order on the relation of the    nearly context-free    formalisms id35,
tag, and lig. while weakly equivalent, they belong to different branches of the (ex-
tended) id154. weir showed that the natural generalization of tag is
to full lcfrs/mid18, while the natural generalization of id35 is to full ig. lcfrs
and ig do not stand in an inclusion relation, although both are very properly contained
in   that is, very much less expressive than   full id19s, which
for practical purposes are essentially as expressive as recursively enumerable systems
(savitch 1987).

this low expressive power brings a proof of polynomial parsability (vijay-shanker
and weir 1994), the signi   cance of which is that standard    divide and conquer    context-
free parsing algorithms readily generalize to id35 and the related formalisms. this
fact, together with its semantic transparency, is the key to the widespread uptake of
id35 in computational linguistic applications, particularly those which require semantic
interpretation and/or accuracy with long-range dependencies, such as id29,
id53, and text entailment (see below).

in considering the rival merits and attractions of some of the alternative forms of
cg considered below, it is worth keeping in mind the question of whether they are
comparable constrained in expressive power and complexity.

4. categorial grammars with wrap combinatory rules. categories
like (8) exhibit a pleasing transparency between the syntactic type (s\np)/np and
the logical form    x   y.likes(cid:48)xy: both functions want the object as    rst argument and the
subject as last argument, re   ecting the binding asymmetry below in the fact that the
subject commands (is attached higher than) the object:

(40) a.

johni likes himselfi.
b. #himselfi likes johni.

(indeed, in such cases the    -binding in the logical form is redundant: we could just
write it as likes(cid:48).)

however, similar binding asymmetries like the following are not so simple:

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

13

(41) a.

i introduced johni to himselfi.
b. #i introduced himselfi to johni.

if we want to continue to capture the binding possibilities in terms of command, then we
need to amke a choice. if we want to retain the simple surface compositional account
of extraction and coordination proposed in sections 3.5 and 3.6 shall need a category
like the following for the ditransitive, in which derivational command and logical form
command are no longer homomorphic:

(42) introduced := ((s\np)/pp)/np :    n   p   y.introduced(cid:48)pny

this category captures the asymmetry in (41) in the fact that the    rst np argument
n lf-commands the second pp argument p in the logical form introduced(cid:48)pny, despite
the fact that the former commands the latter in the derivation according to the syntactic
type. as a consequence, we can no longer eliminate the explicit    -binding logical form,
and if binding theory asymmetries like (41) are to be explained in terms of command, it
cannot be derivational command, but must be commmand at the level of logical form.
this use of logical form should not been seen as proliferating levels of representation
in the theory of grammar, as dowty has suggested. in such versions of cg, logical form
is the only structural level of representation: no rule of syntax or semantics is de   ned
in terms of derivation structure.

if on the other hand we wish to continue to account for such binding asymmetries
in terms of derivational command, maintaining strict isomorphism between syntactic
and semantic types in ditransitive categories like (42), and eliminating any distinction
between derivational structure and logical form, as bach, dowty, and jacobson, among
others, have argued, we need a different category for introduced, taking the pp as its
   rst most oblique argument, and the np as its second.

(43) introduced := ((s\np)/rw np)/pp :    p   n   y.introduced(cid:48)(cid:48)pny

we must also introduce a further combinatory family of    wrapping    rules that    in   x   
the second string argument as    rst argument, as in (44), marking the second argument
of the syntactic type of english polytransitive verbs for combination by such a rule, as
in (43):15

(44) right wrap: (>rw )

(x/rw y)/z : f y : a z : b     x : f ba

bach (1979), jacobson (1992), and dowty (1997) have strongly advocated the inclusion
of wrap rules and categories in cg, both empirically on the basis of a wide variety of
constructions in a number of languages, and on grounds of theoretical parsimony, based
on the fact that all logical forms in categories and rules like (43) and (44) are eliminable,
and derivation structure is the only level of representation in the theory.

there can be no doubt of the empirical strength of the generalization that the linear
order of arguments in verb-initial constructions is typically the inverse of that required
for the command theory of binding. however, the argument from parsimony is less
conclusive. dowty   s claim seems to be that the naive category (42) makes an intrinsic
use of logical form to switch the order of application to the arguments. however, this
operation is entirely local to the lexicon, and therefore seems entirely equivalent to
the same information implicit in the syntactic category inclusion of wrap categories
like (43) in place of (42), together with wrap rules like (44) engenders considerable
complication in the syntactic theory. in particular, the simple and elegant account of

15 such rules correspond to curry and feys 1958 combinator c. there are actually a number of ways that
wrap might be written as a combinatory rule, and it is not always clear from the literature which is assumed.
i follow the categorial notation of bach (1979) and jacobson (1992).

14

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

constituent cluster coordination as a necessary corollary prediction in the bst system
including type-raising and composition alone, exempli   ed earlier by (26), is no longer
available in a combinatory grammar including rule (44) (see dowty 1997 for a very
clear exposition of the dif   culty).

dowty has proposed a number of solutions to this problem, including an    id/lp   
version of categorial grammar (dowty 1996), following zwicky (1986), in which com-
bination (immediate domination id) is discontinuous, and is    ltered by constraints
on order (linear precedence, lp). dowty (1997) shows how a multimodal categorial
grammar of a kind discussed in the next section can be extended with uninterpreted
structural rules of permutation triggered by typed string concatenation operators, (the
latter are reminiscent of the product operator used by pickering and barry (1993) as
an alternative to composition and type-raising for making argument clusters like    bill
to sue    into constituents.) dowty   s grammar captures the full range of constructions
addressed in standard id35, including crossed dependency and argument cluster coor-
dination. however, the theoretical dif   culties are considerable, and the details must
be passed over here. it remains unclear whether structural rules and product operators
can be made to force ross    generalization (29) in the straightforward way that id35
restricted to bts combinatory rules does.

5. lambek grammars. despite a super   cially similar categorial slash notation,
lambek grammars constitute a quite different approach to the extension of the pure
categorial grammar of ajdukiewicz (1935) and bar-hillel (1953), building on the
view of categorial grammar as a logic initiated by lambek (1958, 1961). this ap-
proach treats the categorial slash as a form of (linear) logical implication, for which the
antecedent-canceling application rules perform the role of modus ponens.16

lambek   s contribution was to add further logical axioms of associativity, product-
formation, and division, from which harmonic composition and order-preserving type
raising emerge as theorems (although crossing composition and the s combinator do
not). the resulting calculus was widely assumed to be weakly equivalent to context-
free grammar, although the involvement of an axiom schema in its de   nition meant
that the actual proof of the equivalence was not forthcoming until the work of pentus
(1993). (in fact, the original lambek calculus supports essentially the same analysis
of unbounded dependency as context-free gpsg, but with the advantage of semantic
isomorphism.) paradoxically, despite cf equivalence, the original context-free calculus
lacks a polynomial-time recognition algorithm, because the mapping to equivalent cf
grammars that would afford such an algorithm is not itself polynomial, a result that was
also widely anticipated but hard to prove, until pentus (2003) proved that as well.

5.1. pregroup grammars. partly in response, lambek (2001) has recently pro-
posed pregroup grammar as a simpler context-free base for type-based grammars. like
lg, pregroup grammars (pg) are context-free (buszkowski 2001), but they have a poly-
nomial conversion to id18 (buszkowski and moroz 2008). they inherit the associative
property of lg of combining the english subject and transitive verb as a single op-
eration, rather than tediously requiring two successive operations of type raising and
composition. while pregroup grammar thereby obscures the relation between type

16 the attraction of viewing grammars as logics rather than combinatory algebras or calculi seems to be that
they then support a model theory that can be used as a basis for proofs of soundness and completeness of the
syntax. it should be noticed that such a logic and model theory is distinct from the standard logic implicit in
the applicative semantics for the categorial grammar itself or the corresponding set of standard context-free
productions.

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

15

raising and grammatical case, the associativity operator obeys the principles of adja-
cency, consistency, and inheritance de   ned above, and is de   nable in terms of the com-
binators b and t. it could therefore be consistently incorporated in id35 grammar or
parser, if so desired, without losing the advantages of the latter   s mildly trans-context-
free expressive power.

pregroup grammars are so called because of the involvement of free pregroups as
a mathematical structure in their de   nition. kobele and kracht (2005) show that one
natural generalization of pregroup grammars de   ned in terms of all pregroups and al-
lowing the empty string symbol generates all recursively enumerable languages   that
is, is equivalent to the universal turing machine. tupled pregroup grammars, a more
constrained generalization of context-free pregroup grammars by stabler (2004a,b),
have been shown to be weakly equivalent to set-local mc-tag, the multiple context-
free grammars (mid18s) of seki et al. (1991), and the minimalist grammars of stabler
and keenan (2003). such calculi are, as noted earlier, much more expressive than id35
and tag, being equivalent to full lcfrs. their learnability is investigated by b  echet
et al. (2007).

other generalizations of the original lambek calculi include abstract catego-
rial grammar (de groote 2001; de groote and pogodalla 2004), lambda grammar
(muskens 2007), convergent grammar (cvg) (de groote et al., forthcoming), and the
lambek-grishin calculus or symmetric categorial grammar (moortgat 2007, 2009).
the expressive power of these systems seems likely to be also that of full lcfrs.

5.2. categorial type logic. in a separate development from the original lam-
bek calculi, moortgat (1988a) and van benthem (1988) importantly showed that simply
adding further axioms such as permutation or crossing composition to the lambek cal-
culus causes it (unlike id35) to collapse into permutation completeness. instead, they
and oehrle (1988) proposed to extend the lambek calculus using    structural rules    and
typed slashes of the kind originated by hepple (1990) and discussed in section 3.7,
to control associativity and permutativity. speci   c proposals of this kind include hy-
brid logical grammar (hepple 1990, 1995), type-logical grammars (morrill 1994,
2011; carpenter 1997), term-labeled categorial type systems (oehrle 1994), type-
theoretical grammars (ranta 1994), multimodal categorial grammar (moortgat 1997,
carpenter 1995, moot and puite 2002; moot and retor  e 2012, cf. baldridge 2002).

carpenter and baldridge showed that the type-logical categorial grammars were
potentially very expressive indeed. tlg thus provides the general framework for com-
paring categorial systems of all kinds, including id35 (baldridge and kruijff 2003).

6. semantics in categorial grammars. although the primary appeal of cat-
egorial grammars since montague derives from the aforementioned close relation be-
tween categorial derivation and semantic interpretation, there is a similar diversity in
theories of the exact nature of the mapping from categorial syntax and semantics to
that concerning the exact nature of the syntactic operations themselves. the main focus
of disagreement is on the question of whether a representational level of logical form
distinct from syntactic derivational structure is involved or not.17

montague himself was somewhat divided on this question. in montague 1970a,b he

17 montague   s stern use of the word    proper    in his 1973 title may have re   ected the fact that his treatment
of quanti   ed terms like every syren and a song assigned them the type of proper nouns like john and she
under the description theory of of russell and frege. the implication that other treatments were somehow
improper may have been a donnish pun. this possibility is not always appreciated by those who proliferate
titles in semantics of the form    the proper treatment of x   .

16

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

argued that there was no logical reason why natural languages, any more than formal
logical languages, should have more than one representational level. however, in 1973,
he included operations such as    quantifying in    that made apparently essential use of
logical form via operations with no surface syntactic re   ex. the literature since mon-
tague has similarly followed two diverging paths, which i will distinguish as    sacred   
and    profane   .18

the sacred path usually adhered to by partee, dowty, jacobson, hendriks, and sz-
abolci follows the montague of 1970 in assuming a standard logic such as    rst-order
(modal) predicate logic (fopl) as the language of thought or logical form, and seeking
to eliminate 1973-style intrinsic use of logical form by elaborating the notion of syntac-
tic derivation via various additional combinators, such as wrapping, type-lowering, and
specialized binding combinators. the of   cial name for this sacred approach is    direct
surface compositionality   : it seeks to eliminate logical form and make derivation the
sole structural level of representation.19

because phenomena like the dependency of bound variable pronouns in (1d) tend
to be much less restricted than strictly syntactic dependencies like relativisation, the
sacred approach has in practice shown itself quite willing to abandon the search for low
expressive power in surface syntax characteristic of gpsg and id35. there is a natural
af   nity between the sacred approach to semantics and the more expressive forms of
lambek and type-logical grammars, although carpenter 1997 combines morrill   s type
logical syntax with an essentially profane semantics.

the profane approach follows the opposite strategy. if the chosen representation for
logical form appears to require non-monotonic structure-changing operations such as
quanti   er-raising and quantifying-in (or extraneous equivalent type-changing deriva-
tional operations), then there must just be something wrong in the choice of logical
representation. the logical language itself should be changed, perhaps by eliminating
quanti   ers and introducing discourse referents (kamp and reyle 1993) and referring
expressions (fodor and sag 1982), or skolem terms (kratzer 1998; steedman 1999,
2012; schlenker 2006) in their place. if pronoun binding obeys none of the same gener-
alizations as syntactic derivation, do it non-derivationally (steedman 2012). it is surface
derivation that should be eliminated as a representational level. in fact there may be
very many derivation structures yielding the same logical form. there is a close af   nity
between the profane approach to semantics and computational linguistics.

in the end, the difference between these two approaches may not be very imporant,
since they agree on the principle that there should be only one level of structural repre-
sentation, and differ only on its relation to surface derivation. nevertheless, they have
in practice led to radically different semantic theories. we will consider them brie   y in
turn.

6.1. the sacred approach: direct surface compositionality. the sa-
cred approach to semantics differs from the profane in making the following assump-
tions:

1. surface derivational structure is the only representational level in the theory of
grammar corresponding to logical form and supporting a model theoretic seman-
tics.

18 of course, i am exaggerating the differences for mnemonic reasons. most of us combine both traits.
19 if all one wants to do with a logic is prove truth in a model, then structural representation itself can
technically be eliminated entirely, in favor of direct computation over models. but if you want to do more
general id136, then in practice you need some structural representation.

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

17

2. no other representation of logical form is necessary to the theory of grammar,
and any use of logical formulae to represent meanings distinct from derivation
structures is a mere notational convenience.

dowty (1979), partee and rooth (1983), szabolcsi (1989), chierchia (1988), hen-
driks (1993), jacobson (1999), barker (2002), j  ager (2005), and colleagues follow
montague in seeking to extend categorial grammar to the problem of operator seman-
tics, including pronoun-binding by quanti   ers, exempli   ed in the following:

(45) a. every sailori believes every syren j knows hei heard her j
b. every sailori believes every syren j knows she j saw himi

as noted in the introduction, such examples show that bound variable pronouns are free
to nest or cross dependencies with quanti   cational binders. such dependencies are also
immune to the island boundaries that block relativization, of which the    xed subject
condition illustrated in (46).

(46) a. every sailori believes that hei won.

b. #a syren who(m) every sailori believes that woni

following szabolcsi (1989), these authors seek to bring pronoun binding within the
same system of combinatory projection from the lexicon as syntactic dependency. ja-
cobson (1999; 2007:203-4) assigns pronouns the category of a nominal syntactic and
semantic identity function, with which the verb can compose. however, instead of writ-
ing something like np|np :    x.x as the category for    him    she writes np{np} :    x.x.20
constituents of the type of verbs can be subject to a unary form of composition or
   division   , which she calls the geach rule.21
for example, intransitive    won    s\np can acquire a further category s{np}\np{np} :
   i   y.won(cid:48)y. such geached types can combine with a pronoun (or any np np{np} con-
taining a pronoun, such as    his mother    or    a man he knows   ) by function composition,
so that    he won    yields the category s{np} :    y.won(cid:48)y rather than the standard category
s : won(cid:48)him(cid:48).22
constituents of the same type as verbs can also undergo a unary combinatory
rule which jacobson calls z. for example,    believes    (s\np)/s :    s   y.believes(cid:48)sy
can become (s\np)/s{np} :    p   y.believes(cid:48)(py)y, which on application to    he won   ,
s{np} :    y.won(cid:48)y, yields    believes he won   , s\np :    y.believes(cid:48)(won(cid:48)y)y. this pred-
icate can combine as the argument of the standard generalized quanti   er category for
   every sailor   , s/(s\np) :    p.   y[sailor(cid:48)y     believes(cid:48)(py)y], to yield:

(47) every sailor believes he won s :    y[sailor(cid:48)y     believes(cid:48)(won(cid:48)y)y]

however, the freedom of multiple pronouns to either nest or intercalate bindings to
scoping quanti   ers, as in (45), coupled with the fact that binding may be into and out of
strong islands such as english subject position, as in (46a), means that jacobson   s bind-
ing categories x{y ...} have to form a separate parallel combinatory categorial system. it
is not easy to see who to combine these two combinatory systems in a single grammar
without exploding the category type system. jacobson 1999:105,n.19 in fact proposes
to give up the id35 account of extraction entirely, and to revert to something like the
gpsg account (although it is known to be incomplete   see gazdar 1988).

20 jacobson does not usually include set-delimiting braces {. . .} in her notation for categories including
bindable pronouns, but sentences like (45) show that in general these superscripts are composable (multi)sets.
21 the unary geach rule is implicitly schematized as unary bn along lines exempli   ed for (34).
22 jacobson   -reduces the redundant abstraction in terms like    y.won(cid:48)y to e.g. won(cid:48), but in the absence of

explicit types (as in won(cid:48)

(cid:104)e,t(cid:105)) i let it stand as more intelligible.

18

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

similar problems attend attempts to treat quanti   er scope via surface syntactic deriva-
tion. there is a temptation to think that the    object wide scope    reading of the follow-
ing scope-ambiguous sentence (a) arises from a derivation in which a type-raised object
s\(s/np) :    p.   x[woman x    p x] derivationally commands the nonstandard constituent
s/np :    y.   z[man z     loves yz] to yield s :    x[woman x      z[man z     loves xz]] (eg.
bernardi 2002:22).

(48) a. every man loves a woman.

b. every man loves and every boy fears a woman.

however, (48b) has only the object c-command derivation. yet it undoubtedly has a
narrow scope reading involving possibly different women. if scope is to be handled by
derivational command we therefore have to follow hendriks (1993) in introducing oth-
erwise syntactically unmotivated type-lowering operations, with attendant restrictions
to ensure that they do not then raise again to yield unattested mixed-scope readings,
such as the one in which men love possibly different narrow scope women, and boys all
fear the same wide scope woman.

solutions to all of these problems have been proposed by hendriks, jacobson, and
j  ager, and in the continuation-based combinatory theory of barker (2001) and shan and
barker (2006), but it is not yet clear whether they can be overcome without compromis-
ing the purely syntactic advantages of cg with respect to, for example, extraction. if
not, there is some temptation to consider binding and scope as distinctively anaphoric
properties of logical form that are orthogonal to syntactic derivation, as is standard in
logic proper and in programming language theory.

6.2. the profane approach: natural semantics. the profane approach
to semantics haas been called    natural semantics,    in homage to lakoff   s 1970 pro-
posal for a natural logic underlying the generative semantics approach to the theory of
grammar in the early seventies, of which partee (1970) was an early categorial expo-
nent. the proposal was in   uentially taken up by s  anchez valencia (1991, 1995) and
dowty (1994) within categorial frameworks, and extended elsewhere by maccartney
and manning (2007). natural semantics departs from the sacred approach, and from
other proposals within generative semantics of that period, in three important respects.

1. logical form is the only representational level in the theory of grammar support-

ing a model-theoretic semantics.

2. surface-syntactic derivation is not a level of representation in the theory of gram-
mar, and does not require or support a model theory distinct from that of logical
form. it is merely a description of the computation by which a language processor
builds (or expresses) a logical form from (or as) a string of a particular language,
and is entirely redundant with respect to interpretation or realization of meaning.

3. the language of natural logical form should not be expected to be anything like
traditional logics such as fopl, invented by logicans and mathematicians for
very different purposes. the sole source of information we have as to the nature
of this    hidden    language of thought is linguistic form, under the strong assump-
tion of syntactic/semantic homomorphism shared by all categorial grammarians.

the profane natural approach to semantics therefore questions the core assumption
of lambek and type logical approaches that surface syntax is itself a logic. by the
same token, natural semantics questions the core assumption of direct surface compo-
sitionality concerning the redundancy of logical form. it is derivational structure that is

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

19

semantically redundant, not logical form. if keeping derivation simple requires lexical
logical forms to wrap derivational arguments, as in (42), then let them do so (carpenter
1997:437). if the attested possibilities for quanti   er scope alternation do not seem to be
compatible with any simple account of derivation, then replace generalized quanti   ers
with devices that simplify derivations, such as referring expressions or skolem terms
(steedman 2012).

there have been recent signs of a rapprochement between these views. jacobson
(2002:60) points out that the use of wrap rules in some combinatory versions of
cg demands structural information that is exactly equivalent to that in the profane
   -binding category (42) and dowty   s 1997 concatenation modalities. dowty (1996,
drafted around 1991;2007) has drawn a distinction following curry (1961) between
a level of    tectogrammatics   , de   ning the direct compositional interpretation of the
equivalent of logical form, and one of    phenogrammatics   , equivalent to surface deriva-
tion. dowty 2007:58-60 regards the responsibiity for de   ning the ways phenogrammat-
ical syntax can    encode    tectogrammatical structure as a question for psycholinguistics,
as concerning a processor which he seems to view as approximate and essentially re-
lated to what used to be called performance. these are clear and welcome signs of
convergence between these extremes. perhaps, as is often the case in human affairs, the
sacred and the profane are quite close at heart.

7. computational and psycholinguistic applications. it is unfashion-
able nowadays for linguistic theories to concern themselves with performance. more-
over, most contemporary psychological and computational models of natural language
processing return the compliment by remaining ostentatiously agnostic concerning lin-
guistic theories of competence.

nevertheless, one should never forget that linguistic competence and performance
must come into existence together, as a package deal in evolutionary and developmental
terms. the theory of syntactic competence should therefore ultimately be transparent
to the theory of the processor. one of the attractions of categorial grammars is that they
support a very direct relation between competence grammars and performance parsers.
the central problems for practical language processing by humans or by machine
are twofold. first, natural language grammars are very large, involving thousands of
constructions.
(the lexicon derived from section 02-21 of the categorial id35bank
version of the 1m-word penn wall street journal corpus (hockenmaier and steedman
2007) contains 1224 distinct category types, of which 417 only appear once, and is
known to be incomplete.)

second, natural grammars are hugely ambiguous. as a result, quite unremarkable
sentences of the kind routinely encountered in an even moderately serious newspaper
have thousands of syntactically well-formed analyses. (the reason that human beings
are rarely aware that a sentence has more than a single analysis is that nearly all of the
other analyses are semantically anomalous, especially when the context of discourse is
taken into account.)

the past few years have shown that ambiguity of this degree can be handled practi-
cally in parsers of comparable coverage and robustness to humans, by the use of sta-
tistical models, and in particular those that approximate semantics by modeling se-
mantically relevant head-dependency probabilities such as those between verbs and the
nouns that head their (subject, object, etc.) arguments (hindle and rooth 1993; mager-
man 1995; collins 1997). head-word dependencies compile into the model a powerful
mixture of syntactic, semantic, and world-dependent regularities that can be amazingly

20
effective in reducing search.23

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

categorial grammars of the kinds discussed here were initially expected to be poorly
adapted to practical parsing, because of the additional derivational ambiguity intro-
duced by the nonstandard constituency discussed at the end of section 3.2. however,
a number of algorithmic solutions minimizing redundant combinatory derivation have
been discovered (k  onig 1994; eisner 1996; hockenmaier and bisk 2010).

doran and b. srinivas (2000),hockenmaier and steedman (2002), hockenmaier
(2003, 2006), clark and curran (2004), and auli and lopez (2011a,b,c) have shown
that id35 can be applied to wide-coverage, robust parsing with state-of-the-art perfor-
mance. granroth-wilding (2013) has successfully applied id35 and related statistical
parsing methods to the analysis of musical harmonic progression. birch et al. (2007)
hassan et al. (2009) and mehay and brew (2012) have used id35 categories and parsers
as models for id151.

prevost (1995) applied the nonstandard surface structures of id35 to the control of
id144 and intonation in synthesis of spoken english from information-structured se-
mantics. white (2006) extended this to ef   cient sentence realization for id35, while
kruijff-korbayov  a et al. (2003) have applied id35 in dialog generation. gildea and
hockenmaier (2003) and boxwell et al. (2009, 2010) have applied id35 to and with
id14.

briscoe (2000), buszkowski and penn (1990) and kanazawa (1998) discuss learn-
ability of categorial grammars, while villavicencio (2002, 2011), buttery (2004, 2006),
mcconville (2006), zettlemoyer and collins (2005, 2007), kwiatkowski et al. (2010,
2011, 2012), and krishnamurthy and mitchell (2012) have exploited the semantic trans-
parency of id35 to model id29 and grammar induction from pairs of strings
and logical forms, as a model of child id146 in humans. piantadosi et al.
(2008) have used id35 to model acquisition of quanti   er semantics.

pereira (1990) applied a uni   cation-based version of lambek grammar to the deriva-
tion of quanti   er scope alternation. bos and markert (2005a,b, 2006) and zamansky
et al. (2006) have applied drt-semantic id35 and lambek grammars to text entail-
ment, while harrington and clark (2007, 2009) have used a id35 parser to build se-
mantic networks for large-scale id53, using spreading activation to limit
search and update. indeed, the main current obstacle to further progress in computa-
tional applications is the lack of labeled data for inducing bigger lexicons and models
for stronger parsers, a problem to which unsupervised or semisupervised learning meth-
ods appear to offer the only realistic chance of an affordable solution. the latter meth-
ods have been applied to categorial grammars by watkinson and manandhar (1999);
thomforde (2013) and boonkwan (2013).

grefenstette et al. (2011), grefenstette and sadrzadeh (2011), and kartsaklis et al.
(2013) propose an application of pregroup grammars to compositional assembly of
vector-based distributional semantic interpretations (cf. mitchell and lapata 2008).
lewis and steedman (2013) propose a different form of id65 for
open-class words in id35 based on paraphrase id91, and apply it to text entailment
tasks.

multimodal and type-logical categorial grammars support the notion of    proof
nets    (moortgat 1997; moot and puite 2002), related to an earlier idea of    count invari-
ance   , which has been applied in wide coverage parsing in the grail system by moot
(2010), moot and retor  e (2012). morrill (2000, 2011) seeks to model    garden-path   

23 the two main varieties of statistical model, the probabilistic/generative and the weighted/discriminative,

are discussed by smith and johnson (2007)..

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

21

phenomena and other aspects of human psycholinguistic performance algorithmically
using proof nets, exploiting the potential of generalized categorial grammars to deliver
incremental predominantly left-branching analyses supporting semantic interpretation.
8. conclusion. categorial grammars of all kinds have attractive properties for
theoretical and descriptive linguists, psycholinguists, and computational linguists, be-
cause of their strict lexicalization of all language-speci   c information, and the conse-
quent simplicity of the interface that they offer between syntactic derivation and com-
positional semantics on the one hand, and parsing algorithms and the statistical and
head dependency-based parsing models that support robust wide-coverage natural lan-
guage processing on the other. the non-standard notion of surface derivational structure
that they offer is particularly bene   cial in the cross-linguistic analysis of coordination,
extraction, and intonation structure.

further reading. lyons 1968 includes an early and far-seeing introduction to
pure categorial grammar and its potential role in theoretical linguistics. wood 1993 pro-
vides a balanced survey of historical and early modern approaches. buszkowski et al.
1988, oehrle et al. 1988, and casadio and lambek 2008 provide useful collections of
research articles, the former reprinting a number of historically signi   cant earlier pa-
pers. moortgat 1997, steedman and baldridge 2011, lambek 2008, morrill 2011, moot
and retor  e 2012, and bozs  ahin 2012 are more specialized survey articles and mono-
graphs on some of the contemporary varieties of categorial grammar discussed above,
often with comparisons across approaches. partee 1976, dowty 1979, and barker
and jacobson 2007 represent (mostly) sacred approaches to semantics within catego-
rial grammar, while carpenter 1997 and steedman (2012) represent the unabashedly
profane.

a number of open-source computational linguistic tools for id35 applications are
available at http://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/id35/software.html and via source-
forge at http://openid35.sourceforge.net the categorial id35bank version of
the penn wsj treebank is available from the linguistic data consortium (hockenmaier
and steedman 2005) and has been improved by james curran. hockenmaier has devel-
oped a german id35bank (hockenmaier 2006). the grail type-logical parser and re-
lated resources are available at http://www.labri.fr/perso/moot/grail3.html.

acnowledgements i am grateful to polly jacobson for answering a number of
questions during the preparation of this article, which was supported by eu erc ad-
vanced fellowship 249520 gramplus and eu ip ec-fp7-270273 xperience.

biographical note. the author is the professor of cognitive science in the
school of informatics at the university of edinburgh. he was trained as a psychologist
and a computer scientist. he is a fellow of the british academy, the american asso-
ciation for arti   cial intelligence, and the association for computational linguistics.
he has also held research positions and taught at the universities of sussex, warwick,
texas, and pennsylvania, and his research covers a wide range of issues in theoretical
and computational linguistics, including syntax, semantics, spoken intonation, knowl-
edge representation, and robust wide-coverage natural language processing.

references

ades, anthony and steedman, mark. 1982. on the order of words. linguistics and philosophy 4

517   558.

aho, alfred. 1968. indexed grammars   an extension of context-free grammars. communications of the

22

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

association for computing machinery 15 647   671.

      . 1969. nested stack automata. communications of the association for computing machinery 16 383   

406.

ajdukiewicz, kazimierz. 1935. die syntaktische konnexit  at. storrs mccall (ed.), polish logic 1920   

1939, 207   231. oxford: oxford university press. trans. from studia philosophica, 1, 1-27.

auli, michael and lopez, adam. 2011a. a comparison of loopy belief propagation and dual decompo-
sition for integrated id35 id55 and parsing. proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the as-
sociation for computational linguistics: human language technologies, 470   480. portland, or: acl.
      . 2011b. ef   cient id35 parsing: a* versus adaptive id55. proceedings of the 49th annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, 1577   1585.
portland, or: acl.

      . 2011c. training a log-linear parser with id168s via softmax-margin. proceedings of the con-

ference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 333   343. edinburgh: acl.

bach, emmon. 1979. control in montague grammar. linguistic inquiry 10 513   531.
      . 1983. generalized categorial grammars and the english auxiliary. frank heny and barry richards

(eds.), linguistic categories: auxiliaries and related puzzles, ii, 101   120. dordrecht: reidel.

baldridge, jason. 1998. local scrambling and syntactic asymmetries in tagalog. master   s thesis,

university of pennsylvania.

      . 2002. lexically speci   ed derivational control in id35. ph.d. thesis,

university of edinburgh.

baldridge, jason and kruijff, geert-jan. 2003. multi-modal id35.
proceedings of 11th annual meeting of the european association for computational linguistics, 211   
218. budapest.

bar-hillel, yehoshua. 1953. a quasi-arithmetical notation for syntactic description. language 29

47   58.

bar-hillel, yehoshua, gaifman, chaim, and shamir, eliyahu. 1964. on categorial and phrase
structure grammars. yehoshua bar-hillel (ed.), language and information, 99   115. reading, ma:
addison-wesley.

barker, chris. 2001. integrity: a syntactic constraint on quanti   er scoping. proceedings of the 20th west

coast conference on formal linguistics, 101   114. somerville, ma: cascadilla.

      . 2002. continuations and the nature of quanti   cation. natural language semantics 10 211   242.
barker, chris and jacobson, pauline (eds.). 2007. direct compositionality. oxford university press.
b   echet, denis, foret, annie, and tellier, isabelle. 2007. learnability of pregroup grammars.

studia logica 87 225   252.

bekki, daisuke. 2010. nihongo bunpoo no keesiki riron: katsuyoo taikee, toogo koozoo, imi goosee
[formal theory of japanese grammar: the system of conjugation, syntactic structure, and semantic com-
position]. nihongo kenkyuu soosyo [japanese frontier series] 24. tokyo: kurosio publishers.

bernardi, raffaella. 2002. reasoning with polarity in categorial type-logic. ph.d. thesis, universiteit

utrecht.

berwick, robert and epstein, samuel. 1995. computational minimalism: the convergence of    mini-
malist    syntax and categorial grammar. a. nijholt, g. scollo, and r. steetkamp (eds.), algebraic methods
in language processing 1995: proceedings of the twente workshop on language technology 10, jointly
held with the first algebraic methodology and software technology (amast) workshop on language
processing. enschede, the netherlands: faculty of computer science, universiteit twente.

birch, alexandra, osborne, miles, and koehn, philipp. 2007. id35 supertags in factored transla-
tion models. proceedings of the 2nd workshop on id151, 9   16. held in conjunc-
tion with acl, prague: acl.

bittner, maria. 2011. time and modality without tenses or modals. renate musan and monika rathert

(eds.), tense across language, 147   188. t  ubingen: niemeyer.

      . 2014. temporality: universals and variation. malden, ma: wiley-blackwell.
boeckx, cedric. 2008. bare syntax. oxford: oxford university press.
boonkwan, prachya. 2013. scalable semi-supervised grammar induction using cross-linguistically

parameterized syntactic prototypes. ph.d. thesis, edinburgh.

bos, johan and markert, katja. 2005a. combining shallow and deep nlp methods for recogniz-
ing id123. proceedings of the first pascal challenge workshop on recognizing textual
entailment, 65   68. http://www.pascal-network.org/challenges/rte/: pascal.

      . 2005b. recognising id123 with logical id136. proceedings of the 2005 conference on

empirical methods in natural language processing (emnlp 2005), 628   635.

      . 2006. when logical id136 helps determining id123 (and when it doesn   t). proceedings

of the second pascal challenge workshop on recognizing id123. pascal.

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

23

bosch, peter. 1983. agreement and anaphora. new york: academic press.
bouma, gosse and van noord, gertjan. 1994. constraint-based categorial grammar. proceedings of

the 32nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics. las cruces, nm: acl.

boxwell, stephen, mehay, dennis, and brew, chris. 2009. brutus: a id14 system
incorporating id35, id18, and dependency features. proceedings of the joint conference of the 47th
annual meeting of the acl and the 4th international joint conference on natural language processing
of the afnlp, 37   45. suntec, singapore: acl.

      . 2010. what a parser can learn from a semantic role labeler and vice versa. proceedings of the 2010

conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 736   744. acl.

bozs   ahin, cem. 1998. deriving predicate-argument structure for a free word order language. proceedings

of international conference on computational linguistics, 167   173. montreal: acl.

      . 2002. the combinatory morphemic lexicon. computational linguistics 28 145   186.
      . 2012. combinatory linguistics. berlin: de gruyter.
briscoe, ted. 2000. grammatical acquisition: inductive bias and coevolution of language and the language

acquisition device. language 76 245   296.

buszkowski, wojciech. 2001. lambek grammars based on pregroups. proceedings of logical aspects

of computational linguistics 95   109.

buszkowski, wojciech, marciszewski, witold, and van benthem, johan. 1988. categorial

grammar. amsterdam: john benjamins.

buszkowski, wojciech and moroz, katarzyna. 2008. pregroup grammars and context-free gram-
mars. claudia casadio and joachim lambek (eds.), computational algebraic approaches to natural
language, 1   21. monzah: polimetrica.

buszkowski, wojciech and penn, gerald. 1990. categorial grammars determined from linguistic data

by uni   cation. studia logica 49 431   454.

buttery, paula. 2004. a quantitative evaluation of naturalistic models of id146; the ef   -
ciency of the triggering learning algorithm compared to a categorial grammar learner. proceedings of the
workshop on psycho-computational models of human id146, 3   10. geneva: coling.
      . 2006. computational models for first id146. ph.d. thesis, university of cambridge.
carpenter, bob. 1995. the turing-completeness of multimodal categorial grammars. jelle gerbrandy,
maarten marx, maarten de rijke, and yde venema (eds.), papers presented to johan van benthem in
honor of his 50th birthday. european summer school in logic, language and information, utrecht,
1999. amsterdam: illc, university of amsterdam.

      . 1997. type-logical semantics. cambridge, ma: mit press.
casadio, claudia. 2001. non-commutative linear logic in linguistics. grammars 4 167   185.
casadio, claudia and lambek, joachim (eds.). 2008. computational algebraic approaches to natural

language. polimetrica.

c   akici, ruket. 2005. automatic induction of a id35 grammar for turkish. proceedings of the student

workshop, 43rd annual meeting of the acl, ann arbor mi, 73   78. acl.

      . 2009. parser models for a highly in   ected language. ph.d. thesis, university of edinburgh.
cha, jeongwon and lee, geunbae. 2000. structural disambiguation of morpho-syntactic categorial
parsing for korean. proceedings of the 18th international conference on computational linguistics,
1002   1006. saarbr  ucken: acl.

chierchia, gennaro. 1988. aspects of a categorial theory of binding. richard oehrle, emmon bach,
and deirdre wheeler (eds.), categorial grammars and natural language structures, 125   151. dordrecht:
reidel.

chomsky, noam. 1957. syntactic structures. the hague: mouton.
      . 1995. bare phrase structure. gert webelhuth (ed.), government and binding theory and the minimalist

program, 383   439. oxford: blackwell.

ciardelli, ivano and roelofsen, floris. 2011. inquisitive logic. journal of philosophical logic 40

55   94.

clark, stephen and curran, james r. 2004. parsing the wsj using id35 and id148.
proceedings of the 42nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, 104   111.
barcelona, spain: acl.

collins, michael. 1997. three generative lexicalized models for statistical parsing. proceedings of the

35th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, 16   23. madrid: acl.

cooper, robin. 1983. quanti   cation and syntactic theory. dordrecht: reidel.
cormack, annabel and smith, neil. 2005. what is coordination? lingua 115 395   418.

24

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

curry, haskell. 1961. some logical aspects of grammatical structure. roman jakobson (ed.), structure of
language and its mathematical aspects, proceedings of the symposium in applied mathematics, vol. 12,
56   68. providence, ri: american mathematical society.

curry, haskell b. and feys, robert. 1958. combinatory logic: vol. i. amsterdam: north holland.
davidson, donald and harman, gilbert (eds.). 1972. semantics of natural language. dordrecht:

reidel.

de groote, philippe. 2001. towards abstract categorial grammars. proceedings of the 39th annual

meeting of the association for computational linguistics, 148   155. toulouse: acl.

de groote, philippe and pogodalla, sylvain. 2004. on the expressive power of abstract categorial
grammars: representing context-free formalisms. journal of logic, language and information 13 421   
438.

de groote, philippe, pogodalla, sylvain, and pollard, carl. forthcoming. about parallel and
syntactocentric formalisms: what the encoding of convergent grammar into abstract categorial gram-
mar tells us. fundamenta informaticae .

doran, christy and b. srinivas. 2000. a wide coverage id35 parser. anne abeille and owen ram-
bow (eds.), proceedings of the 3rd tag+ workshop, jussieu, march 1994, 405   426. stanford, ca: csli
publications.

dowty, david. 1979. word meaning in montague grammar. dordrecht: reidel, 1st edn.
      . 1982. grammatical relations and montague grammar. pauline jacobson and geoffrey k. pullum

(eds.), the nature of syntactic representation, 79   130. dordrecht: reidel.

      . 1988. type-raising, functional composition, and nonconstituent coordination. richard oehrle, em-
mon bach, and deirdre wheeler (eds.), categorial grammars and natural language structures, 153   198.
dordrecht: reidel.

      . 1994. the role of negative polarity and concord marking in natural language reasoning. proceedings of
the 4th conference on semantics and theoretical linguistics. rochester, ny: clc publications, cornell
university.

      . 1996. towards a minimalist theory of syntactic structure. harry bunt and arthur van horck (eds.),

discontinuous constituency, 11   62. the hague: mouton de gruyter.

      . 1997. nonconstituent coordination, wrapping, and multimodal categorial grammars: syntactic form
as logical form. maria luisa dalla chiara (ed.), structures and norms in science, 347   368. berlin:
springer. extended version at http://www.ling.ohio-state.edu/~dowty/.

      . 2003. the dual analysis of adjuncts/complements in categorial grammar. ewald lang, claudia maien-

born, and cathry fabricius-hansen (eds.), modifying adjuncts, 33   66. berlin: mouton de gruyter.

      . 2007. compositionality as an empirical problem. chris barker and pauline jacobson (eds.), direct

compositionality, 23   101. oxford: oxford university press.

eisner, jason. 1996. ef   cient normal-form parsing for id35. proceedings of
the 34th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, santa cruz, ca, 79   86. san
francisco: morgan kaufmann.

fodor, janet dean and sag, ivan. 1982. referential and quanti   cational inde   nites. linguistics and

philosophy 5 355   398.

frege, gottlob. 1879. begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete formelsprache des reinen
denkens. halle: louis nebert. translated with commentary and corrections as    begriffsschrift, a formula
language, modeled upon that of arithmetic, for pure thought,    in van heijenoort 1967:1-82.

gazdar, gerald. 1981. unbounded dependencies and coordinate structure. linguistic inquiry 12 155   

184.

      . 1988. applicability of indexed grammars to natural languages. uwe reyle and christian rohrer (eds.),

natural language parsing and linguistic theories, 69   94. dordrecht: reidel.

geach, peter. 1970. a program for syntax. synth`ese 22 3   17. reprinted as davidson and harman

1972:483   497.

gildea, dan and hockenmaier, julia. 2003. identifying semantic roles using combinatory categorial
grammar. proceedings of the 2003 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing,
57   64. sapporo, japan.

granroth-wilding, mark. 2013. harmonic analysis of music using id35.

ph.d. thesis, university of edinburgh.

grefenstette, edward and sadrzadeh, mehrnoosh. 2011. experimental support for a categori-
cal compositional distributional model of meaning. proceedings of the 2011 conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing, 1394   1404. edinburgh: acl.

grefenstette, edward, sadrzadeh, mehrnoosh, clark, stephen, coeke, bob, and pulman,
stephen. 2011. concrete sentence spaces for compositional distributional models of meaning. proceed-
ings of the 9th international conference on computational semantics, 125   134. oxford: iwcs.

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

25

groenendijk, jeroen and stokhof, martin. 1991. dynamic predicate logic. linguistics and philoso-

phy 14 39   100.

harrington, brian and clark, stephen. 2007. asknet: automated semantic knowledge network.
proceedings of the 22nd national conference on arti   cial intelligence (aaai   07), 889   894. aaai press.
      . 2009. asknet: creating and evaluating large scale integrated semantic networks. international journal

of semantic computing 2 343   364.

hassan, hany, sima   an, khalil, and way, andy. 2009. a syntacti   ed direct translation model with
linear-time decoding. proceedings of the 2009 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing, 1182   1191. singapore: acl.

heim, irene and kratzer, angelika. 1998. semantics in generative grammar. oxford: blackwell.
hendriks, herman. 1993. studied flexibility: categories and types in syntax and semantics. ph.d.

thesis, universiteit van amsterdam.

hepple, mark. 1990. the grammar and processing of order and dependency: a categorial approach.

ph.d. thesis, university of edinburgh.

      . 1995. hybrid categorial logics. logic journal of igpl 3 343   355.
hindle, donald and rooth, mats. 1993. structural ambiguity and lexical relations. computational

linguistics 19 103   120.

hockenmaier, julia. 2003. parsing with generative models of predicate-argument structure. proceedings
of the 41st meeting of the association for computational linguistics, sapporo, 359   366. san francisco:
morgan-kaufmann.

      . 2006. creating a id35bank and a wide-coverage id35 lexicon for german. proceedings of the 44th

annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, 505   512. sydney: acl.

hockenmaier, julia and bisk, yonatan. 2010. normal-form parsing for combinatory categorial
grammars with generalized composition and type-raising. proceedings of the 23nd international confer-
ence on computational linguistics, 465   473. beijing.

hockenmaier, julia and steedman, mark. 2002. generative models for statistical parsing with com-
binatory categorial grammar. proceedings of the 40th meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, 335   342. philadelphia.

      . 2005. id35bank. ldc2005t13. isbn 1-58563-340-2.
      . 2007. id35bank: a corpus of id35 derivations and dependency structures extracted from the penn

treebank. computational linguistics 33 355   396.

hoeksema, jack and janda, r. 1988.

implications of process morphology for categorial grammar.
richard oehrle, emmon bach, and deirdre wheeler (eds.), categorial grammars and natural language
structures, 199   248. dordrecht: reidel.

hoffman, beryl. 1995. computational analysis of the syntax and interpretation of    free    word-order in
turkish. ph.d. thesis, university of pennsylvania. publ. as ircs report 95   17. philadelphia: university
of pennsylvania.

hoyt, frederick and baldridge, jason. 2008. a logical basis for the d combinator and normal form
in id35. proceedings of association for computational linguistics-08: hlt, 326   334. columbus, oh:
acl.

huybregts, riny. 1984. the weak inadequacy of context-free phrase-structure grammars. ger de haan,

mieke trommelen, and wim zonneveld (eds.), van periferie naar kern, 81   99. dordrecht: foris.

jacobson, pauline. 1992. the lexical entailment theory of control and the tough construction. ivan sag

and anna szabolcsi (eds.), lexical matters, 269   300. stanford, ca: csli publications.

      . 1999. towards a variable-free semantics. linguistics and philosophy 22 117   184.
      . 2002. the (dis)organization of the grammar. linguistics and philosophy 25 601   626.
      . 2007. direct compositionality and variable-free semantics: the case of    principle b    effects. chris
barker and pauline jacobson (eds.), direct compositionality, 191   236. oxford: oxford university press.

j   ager, gerhard. 2005. anaphora and type-logical grammar. dordrecht: springer.
joshi, aravind. 1988. tree-adjoining grammars. david dowty, lauri karttunen, and arnold zwicky

(eds.), natural language parsing, 206   250. cambridge: cambridge university press.

kamp, hans and reyle, uwe. 1993. from discourse to logic. dordrecht: kluwer.
kanazawa, makoto. 1998. learnable classes of categorial grammars. stanford, ca: csli/folli.
kanazawa, makoto and salvati, sylvain. 2012. mix is not a tree-adjoining language. proceedings
of the 50th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long papers),
666   674. jeju island, korea: acl.

kang, beom-mo. 1995. on the treatment of complex predicates in categorial grammar. linguistics and

philosophy 18 61   81.

26

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

      . 2002. categories and meanings of korean    oating quanti   ers   with some reference to japanese.

journal of east asian linguistics 11 485   534.

kartsaklis, dimitri, sadrzadeh, mehrnoosh, and pulman, stephen. 2013. separating disam-
biguation from composition in id65. proceedings of the conference on natural lan-
guage learning, 114   123. so   a: acl.

karttunen, lauri. 1989. radical lexicalism. mark baltin and anthony kroch (eds.), alternative con-

ceptions of phrase structure, 43   65. chicago: university of chicago press.

kempson, ruth and cormack, annabel. 1981. ambiguity and quanti   cation. linguistics and philos-

ophy 4 259   309.

kobele, gregory and kracht, marcus. 2005. on pregroups, freedom, and (virtual) conceptual neces-
sity. proceedings of the 28th annual penn linguistics colloquium, university of pennsylvania working
papers in linguistics. philadelphia.

koller, alexander and thater, stefan. 2006. an improved redundancy elimination algorithm for
underspeci   ed descriptions. proceedings of the international conference on computational linguis-
tics/association for computational linguistics, 409   416. sydney: coling/acl.

komagata, nobo. 1999. information structure in texts: a computational analysis of contextual appro-

priateness in english and japanese. ph.d. thesis, university of pennsylvania.

k   onig, esther. 1994. a hypothetical reasoning algorithm for linguistic analysis. journal of logic and

computation 4 1   19.

kratzer, angelika. 1998. scope or pseudo-scope: are there wide-scope inde   nites? susan rothstein

(ed.), events in grammar, 163   196. dordrecht: kluwer.

krishnamurthy, jayant and mitchell, tom. 2012. weakly supervised training of semantic parsers.
proceedings of joint conference on empirical methods in natural language processing and computa-
tional natural language learning, 754   765. jeju island, korea: acl.

kruijff-korbayov   a, ivana, ericsson, stina, rodr  iguez, kepa joseba, and karagrjosova,
elena. 2003. producing contextually appropriate intonation in an information-state based dialogue sys-
tem. proceedings of the 10th conference of the european chapter of the association for computational
linguistics (eacl), 227   234. budapest, hungary: acl.

kubota, yusuke. 2010. (in)   exibility of constituency in japanese in multi-modal categorial grammar

with structured phonology. ph.d. thesis, ohio state university.

kwiatkowski, tom, goldwater, sharon, zettlemoyer, luke, and steedman, mark. 2012. a
probabilistic model of syntactic and semantic acquisition from child-directed utterances and their mean-
ings. proceedings of the 13th conference of the european chapter of the acl (eacl 2012), 234   244.
avignon: acl.

kwiatkowski, tom, zettlemoyer, luke, goldwater, sharon, and steedman, mark. 2010.
inducing probabilistic id35 grammars from logical form with higher-order uni   cation. proceedings of
the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 1223   1233. cambridge, ma:
acl.

      . 2011. lexical generalization in id35 grammar induction for id29. proceedings of the

conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 1512   1523. edinburgh: acl.

lakoff, george. 1970. linguistics and natural logic. synth  ese 22 151   271. reprinted in davidson and

harman 1972:545   665.

lambek, joachim. 1958. the mathematics of sentence structure. american mathematical monthly 65

154   170.

      . 1961. on the calculus of syntactic types. roman jakobson (ed.), structure of language and its math-
ematical aspects, proceedings of the symposium in applied mathematics, vol. 12, 166   178. providence,
ri: american mathematical society.

      . 2001. type grammars as pregroups. grammars 4 21   39.
      . 2008. from word to sentence. milan: polimetrica.
lee, jungmee and tonhauser, judith. 2010. temporal interpretation without tense: korean and

japanese coordination constructions. journal of semantics 27 307   341.

lewis, michael and steedman, mark. 2013. combined distributional and logical semantics. transac-

tions of the association for computational linguistics 1 179   192.

lyons, john. 1968. introduction to theoretical linguistics. cambridge: cambridge university press.
maccartney, bill and manning, christopher d. 2007. natural logic for textual id136. proceed-

ings of the acl-pascal workshop on id123 and id141, 193   200. prague: acl.

magerman, david. 1995. statistical decision tree models for parsing. proceedings of the 33rd annual

meeting of the association for computational linguistics, 276   283. cambridge, ma: acl.

mcconville, mark. 2006. inheritance and the id35 lexicon. proceedings of the 11th conference of the

european chapter of the association for computational linguistics, 1   8. acl.

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

27

mehay, denis and brew, chris. 2012. id35 syntactic reordering models for phrase-based machine trans-
lation. proceedings of the seventh workshop on id151, xxx   xxx. montr  eal:
acl.

mitchell, jeff and lapata, mirella. 2008. vector-based models of semantic composition. proceedings
of the annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, 236   244. columbus, oh: acl.
montague, richard. 1970a. english as a formal language. bruno visentini (ed.), linguaggi nella societ`a

e nella technica, 189   224. milan: edizioni di communit`a. reprinted as thomason 1974:188-221.

      . 1970b. universal grammar. theoria 36 373   398. reprinted as thomason 1974:222-246.
      . 1973. the proper treatment of quanti   cation in ordinary english. jaakko hintikka, j. m. e. moravcsik,
and patrick suppes (eds.), approaches to natural language: proceedings of the 1970 stanford workshop
on grammar and semantics, 221   242. dordrecht: reidel. reprinted as thomason 1974:247-279.

moortgat, michael. 1988a. categorial investigations. ph.d. thesis, universiteit van amsterdam. pub-

lished by foris, dordrecht, 1989.

      . 1988b. mixed composition and discontinuous dependencies. richard oehrle, emmon bach, and
deirdre wheeler (eds.), categorial grammars and natural language structures, 319   348. dordrecht:
reidel.

      . 1997. categorial type logics. johan van benthem and alice ter meulen (eds.), handbook of logic and

language, 93   177. amsterdam: north holland.

      . 2007. symmetries in natural language syntax and semantics: the lambek-grishin calculus. pro-
ceedings of workshop on logic, language, information, and computation (wollic), lexture notes in
computer science 4576, 264   284. berlin: springer-verlag.

      . 2009. symmetric categorial grammar. journal of philosophical logic 38 681   710.
moot, richard. 2002. proof nets for linguistic analysis. ph.d. thesis, university of utrecht.
      . 2010. automated extraction of type-logical supertags from the spoken dutch corpus. srinivas banga-
lore and aravind joshi (eds.), complexity of lexical descriptions and its relevance to natural language
processing: a id55 approach. cambridge, ma: mit press.

moot, richard and puite, quintijn. 2002. proof nets for the multimodal lambek calculus. studia

logica 71 415   442.

moot, richard and retor   e, christian. 2012. the logic of categorial grammars. no. 6850 in lecture

notes in computer science. berlin: springer.

morrill, glyn. 1994. type-logical grammar. dordrecht: kluwer.
      . 2000. incremental processing and acceptability. computational linguistics 26 319   338.
morrill, glynn. 2011. categorial grammar: logical syntax, semantics, and processing. oxford: oxford

university press.

morrill, glynn and solias, teresa. 1993. tuples, discontinuity, and gapping. proceedings of 6th
conference of the european chapter of the association for computational linguistics, 287   297. utrecht:
acl.

muskens, reinhard. 2007. separating syntax and combinatorics in categorial grammar. research on

language & computation 5 267   285.

nishida, chiyo. 1996. second position clitics in old spanish and categorial grammar. aaron halpern
and arnold zwicky (eds.), approaching second: second-position clitics and related phenomena, 33   
373. stanford, ca: csli publications.

oehrle, richard. 1988. multidimensional compositional functions as a basis for grammatical analysis.
richard oehrle, emmon bach, and deirdre wheeler (eds.), categorial grammars and natural language
structures, 349   390. dordrecht: reidel.

      . 1994. term-labelled categorial type systems. linguistics and philosophy 17 633   678.
oehrle, richard, bach, emmon, and wheeler, deirdre (eds.). 1988. categorial grammars and

natural language structures. dordrecht: reidel.

park, jong and cho, hyung-joon. 2000. informed parsing for coordination with combinatory catego-
rial grammar. proceedings of the 18th international conference on computational linguistics, 593   599.
saarbr  ucken: coling/acl.

partee, barbara. 1970. negation, conjunction, and quanti   ers: syntax vs. semantics. foundations of

language 6 153   165.

      . 1975. montague grammar and transformational grammar. linguistic inquiry 6 203   300.
partee, barbara (ed.). 1976. montague grammar. new york: academic press.
partee, barbara and rooth, mats. 1983. generalised conjunction and type ambiguity. rainer b  auerle,
christoph schwarze, and arnim von stechow (eds.), meaning, use, and interpretation of language, 361   
383. berlin: de gruyter.

pentus, mati. 1993. lambek grammars are context-free. proceedings of the ieee symposium on logic

in computer science, montreal, 429   433.

28

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

      . 2003. lambek calculus is np-complete. tech. rep. tr-2003005, graduate center, city university of

new york, new york.

pereira, fernando. 1990. categorial semantics and scoping. computational linguistics 16 1   10.
pereira, fernando and shieber, stuart. 1987. prolog and natural language analysis. stanford, ca:

csli publications.

piantadosi, steven, goodman, noah, ellis, benjamin, and tenenbaum, joshua. 2008. a
bayesian model of the acquisition of id152. proceedings of the 30th annual meeting
of the cognitive science society, 1620   1625. washington dc.

pickering, martin and barry, guy. 1993. dependency categorial grammar and coordination. linguis-

tics 31 855   902.

poesio, massimo. 1995. disambiguation as (defeasible) reasoning about underspeci   ed representations.

papers from the tenth amsterdam colloquium. amsterdam: illc, universiteit van amsterdam.

pollard, carl. 1984. generalized id18s, head grammars, and natural languages.

ph.d. thesis, stanford university.

prevost, scott. 1995. a semantics of contrast and information structure for specifying intonation in

spoken language generation. ph.d. thesis, university of pennsylvania.

ranta, aarne. 1994. type-theoretical grammar. oxford: oxford university press.
reyle, uwe. 1993. dealing with ambiguities by underspeci   cation. journal of semantics 10 123   179.
robinson, abraham. 1974. introduction to model theory and to the metamathematics of algebra. am-

sterdam: north holland, 2nd ed. edn.

ross, john robert. 1970. gapping and the order of constituents. manfred bierwisch and karl heidolph

(eds.), progress in linguistics, 249   259. the hague: mouton.

ruangrajitpakorn, taneth, trakultaweekoon, kanokorn, and supnithi, thepchai. 2009. a
syntactic resource for thai: cg treebank. proceedings of the 7th workshop on asian language resources,
96   102. suntec, singapore: acl.

s   anchez valencia, v  ictor. 1991. studies on natural logic and categorial grammar. ph.d. thesis,

universiteit van amsterdam.

      . 1995. parsing-driven id136: natural logic. linguistic analysis 25 258   285.
savitch, walter. 1987. context-sensitive grammar and natural language syntax. walter savitch, emmon
bach, william marsh, and gila safran-naveh (eds.), the formal complexity of natural language, 358   
368. dordrecht: reidel.

schlenker, philippe. 2006. scopal independence: a note on branching and wide scope readings of

inde   nites and disjunctions. journal of semantics 23 281   314.

seki, hiroyuki, matsumura, takashi, fujii, mamoru, and kasami, tadao. 1991. on multiple

context-free grammars. theoretical computer science 88 191   229.

shan, chung-chieh and barker, chris. 2006. explaining crossover and superiority as left-to-right

evaluation. linguistics and philosophy 29 91   134.

shieber, stuart. 1985. evidence against the context-freeness of natural language. linguistics and phi-

losophy 8 333   343.

      . 1986. an introduction to uni   cation-based approaches to grammar. stanford, ca: csli publications.
smith, noah and johnson, mark. 2007. weighted and id140 are equally

expressive. computational linguistics 33 477   491.

srinivas, bangalore. 1997. complexity of lexical descriptions and its relevance to partial parsing.

ph.d. thesis, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia. published as ircs report 97-10.

stabler, edward. 2004a. tupled pregroup grammars. claudia casadio and joachim lambek (eds.),

computational algebraic approaches to morphology and syntax, 23   52. milan: polimetrica.

      . 2004b. varieties of crossing dependencies: structure-dependence and mild context sensitivity. cogni-

tive science 28 699   720.

      . 2011. computational perspectives on minimalism. cedric boeckx (ed.), oxford handbook of linguis-

tic minimalism, 617   641. oxford university press.

stabler, edward and keenan, edward. 2003. structural similarity. theoretical computer science

293 345   363.

steedman, mark. 1985. dependency and coordination in the grammar of dutch and english. language

61 523   568.

      . 1987. combinatory grammars and parasitic gaps. natural language and linguistic theory 5 403   439.
      . 1990. gapping as constituent coordination. linguistics and philosophy 13 207   263.
      . 1996. surface structure and interpretation. linguistic inquiry monograph 30. cambridge, ma: mit

press.

c a t e g o r i a l g r a m m a r

29

      . 1999. quanti   er scope alternation in id35. proceedings of the 37th annual meeting of the association

for computational linguistics, 301   308. college park, md: acl.

      . 2000a. information structure and the syntax-phonology interface. linguistic inquiry 34 649   689.
      . 2000b. the syntactic process. cambridge, ma: mit press.
      . 2012. taking scope: the natural semantics of quanti   ers. cambridge, ma: mit press.
steedman, mark and baldridge, jason. 2011. id35. robert borsley
and kirsti b  orjars (eds.), non-transformational syntax: a guide to current models, 181   224. oxford:
blackwell.

steele, susan. 1990. agreement and anti-agreement: a syntax of luise  no. dordrecht: reidel.
szabolcsi, anna. 1983. ecp in categorial grammar. ms., max planck institute, nijmegen.
      . 1989. bound variables in syntax: are there any? renate bartsch, johan van benthem, and peter van

emde boas (eds.), semantics and contextual expression, 295   318. dordrecht: foris.

      . 1992. on combinatory grammar and projection from the lexicon. ivan sag and anna szabolcsi (eds.),

lexical matters, 241   268. stanford, ca: csli publications.

szabolcsi, anna (ed.). 1997. ways of scope-taking. dordrecht: kluwer.
thomason, richmond (ed.). 1974. formal philosophy: papers of richard montague. new haven, ct:

yale university press.

thomforde, emily. 2013. semi-supervised lexical acquisition for wide-coverage parsing. ph.d. thesis,

university of edinburgh.

trechsel, frank. 2000. a id35 account of tzotzil pied piping. natural language and linguistic theory

18 611   663.

tse, daniel and curran, james r. 2010. chinese id35bank: extracting id35 derivations from the
penn chinese treebank. proceedings of the 23rd international conference on computational linguistics,
1083   1091. beijing: coling/acl.

uszkoreit, hans. 1986. categorial uni   cation grammars. proceedings of the international conference on

computational linguistics, 187   194. bonn: coling/acl.

van benthem, johan. 1983. five easy pieces. alice ter meulen (ed.), studies in model-theoretic seman-

tics, 1   17. dordrecht: foris.

      . 1986. essays in logical semantics. dordrecht: reidel.
      . 1988. the semantics of variety in categorial grammar. wojciech buszkowski, witold marciszewski,

and johan van benthem (eds.), categorial grammar, 37   55. amsterdam: john benjamins.

van heijenoort, jean (ed.). 1967. from frege to g  odel: a source book in mathematical logic, 1879   

1931. cambridge, ma: harvard university press.

vijay-shanker, k. and weir, david. 1994. the equivalence of four extensions of context-free grammar.

mathematical systems theory 27 511   546.

villavicencio, aline. 2002. the acquisition of a uni   cation-based generalised categorial grammar.

ph.d. thesis, university of cambridge.

      . 2011. id146 with feature-based grammars. robert boyer and kirsti b  orjars (eds.),

non-transformational syntax: a guide to current models, 404   442. blackwell.

watkinson, stephen and manandhar, suresh. 1999. unsupervised lexical learning with categorial
grammars. proceedings of the workshop on unsupervised learning in natural language processing,
acl-99, college park ma, 59   66. association for computational linguistics.

webber, bonnie. 1978. a formal approach to discourse anaphora. ph.d. thesis, harvard university.

published by garland, new york, 1979.

weir, david. 1988. characterizing mildly context-sensitive grammar formalisms. ph.d. thesis, univer-

sity of pennsylvania, philadelphia. published as technical report cis-88-74.

white, michael. 2006. ef   cient realization of coordinate structures in id35.

research on language and computation 4 39   75.

whitelock, pete. 1991. what sort of trees do we speak?: a computational model of the syntax-id144
interface in tokyo japanese. proceedings of the fifth conference of the european chapter of the associ-
ation for computational linguistics, 75   82. berlin, germany: acl.

wittenburg, kent. 1987. predictive combinators: a method for ef   cient processing of combinatory
grammars. proceedings of the 25th annual conference of the association for computational linguistics,
73   80. stanford: acl.

wood, mary mcgee. 1993. categorial grammars. london: routledge.
zamansky, anna, francez, nissim, and winter, yoad. 2006. a    natural logic    id136 system

using the lambek calculus. journal of logic, language, and information 15 273   295.

zeevat, henk. 1988. combining categorial grammar and uni   cation. uwe reyle and christian rohrer

(eds.), natural language parsing and linguistic theories, 202   229. dordrecht: reidel.

30

d r a f t

1 . 0 ,

february 9, 2014

zettlemoyer, luke and collins, michael. 2005. learning to map sentences to logical form: struc-
tured classi   cation with probabilistic categorial grammars. proceedings of the 21st conference on un-
certainty in ai (uai), 658   666. edinburgh: aaai.

      . 2007. online learning of relaxed id35 grammars for parsing to logical form. proceedings of the joint
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing and computational natural language
learning (emnlp/conll), 678   687. prague: acl.

zwicky, arnold. 1986. concatenation and liberation. cls 22: papers from the general session, 65   74.

chicago linguistic society, chicago: university of chicago.

