(k) sentences that go on and on and on and on (1/2) [10 points] 

i live in the house. 
i live in the house on the hill. 
i live in the house on the hill in the city. 
i live in the house on the hill in the city on the border. 

i saw a cat. 
i saw a cat climbing up a tree. 
i saw a cat climbing up a tree growing on a planet. 
i saw a cat climbing up a tree growing on a planet orbiting around the sun. 

sometimes a sentence can be made longer by adding words in a regular way. in some cases a consistent 
pattern of several words can be added (   climbing up a tree    and    growing on a planet    use different words, 
but have the same word types): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answer the following questions in the answer sheets. 
 
k1. first, write down the word types that form each pattern, using adjective, verb, noun, preposition, and 
article (a table of words and types is included at the end of the problem): 
 
 
  b. i live in the house on the hill in the city on the border. 
 
now, for each case, write a fifth line that follows the pattern. you may use words not shown in the table be-
low, but the words you use should follow the patterns you identified: 

a. i saw a cat climbing up a tree growing on a planet orbiting around the sun. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 

 

 

 

b. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
k2. a computer program was written to identify these patterns. it worked as follows: 
 
     set current guess to none 
     check whether the last word   s type matches the second-last word   s type, if it does, change guess to the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

last word   s type 

     check whether the last pair of words    types match the pair before them, if they do, change guess to the 

types of the last pair 

     check whether the last three words    types match the three before them, if they do, change guess to the 

types of the last three words 
(and so on until the first half of the sentence and second half of the sentence are being compared) 

    
     return the current guess 

(k) sentences that go on and on and on and on (2/2) 

if each time k words are compared it takes k steps, how many steps will it take to run the program on this 
example: i run and jump and twirl. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

k3. for the two examples below, would the computer find the right pattern? if so, write    yes   , if not, write 
   no    and what pattern (verb, noun, etc.), it would return instead. 
 
 
  b. i live in the house on the hill in the city on the border. 

a. i saw a cat climbing up a tree growing on a planet orbiting around the sun. 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 

 

b. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

k4. some sentence patterns can go on and on and on, but the computer program above will never be able 
to find a repeating sequence in them, no matter how long the sentences go.  give an example of such a sen-
tence pattern. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

   

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

word types 
 
all the words used in the examples above can be found in the lists of word types below. in the first question 
you may use words in your example that are not shown here. 

noun 

  noun 

  verb 

  verb 

  preposition 

  adjective 

  article 

border 

  house 

  climbing 

  orbiting 

  around 

cat 

city 

hat 

hill 

 

i 

  growing 

  run 

  planet 

  sun 

  tree 

  have 

 

 

jump 

live 

  saw 

  twirl 

 

 

 

in 

  on 

  up 

 

 

  blue 

  nice 

  a 

  the 

  waterproof 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  conjunction 

  and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

