(o) common sense (1/2) [10 points] 

in english, we may find pairs of sentences that are minimally different, but in which the pronouns (words like 
   he   ,    she   , or    it   ) refer back to completely different antecedents (where a pronoun   s antecedent is the 
word or phrase that the pronoun refers to). for example, consider the following sentences: 
 

james scolded caleb because he stole the diamonds.  
 

 

 

james scolded caleb because he was angry. 

in these two sentences, the pronoun    he    refers to two different antecedents:    james    and    caleb   . figuring 
out whether the pronoun refers to james or caleb relies on common sense and world knowledge     those 
who steal diamonds should be scolded, and those doing the scolding are usually angry. this knowledge is 
something that humans have, but computers don   t, making pronoun disambiguation difficult. 
 
in the alternate universe of terra, where people speak a language similar to english but with variants of many 
words, 6 rather clumsy sisters (named barnard, holyoke, radcliffe, smith, vassar, and wellesley) are all going 
to a party.* they each own exactly one of the following types of items: a lapsine, a ricktick, a plumbus, or a 
riplin. 
 
the following ensued (these sentences are in no particular order): 
 
(1) 
(2)  barnard elamped radcliffe   s lapsine because she was not molistic, so radcliffe catabulled barnard. 
(3)  holyoke did not stipe because vassar   s riplin elamped and holyoke could not mirt there. 
(4) 
(5)  barnard   s ricktick did not schleem radcliffe   s lapsine because it was too efrimious. 
(6)  radcliffe un-elamped her lapsine and stiped bevint everyone else who stiped. 
(7)  vassar catabulled holyoke because she elamped the plumbus (which happened at about the same time 

smith stiped ravint wellesley even though her plumbus elamped. 

smith catabulled vassar because she elamped her plumbus. 

as when holyoke elamped vassar   s riplin.) 

(8)  radcliffe   s lapsine did not schleem holyoke   s riplin because it was too un-efrimious. 
(9)  vassar stiped ravint radcliffe because she had a riplin with her. 
(10)  vassar (using holyoke   s riplin) stiped bevint smith. 
(11)  wellesley stiped bevint vassar, with her lapsine and barnard   s ricktick because it schleemed it and no 

other item. 

 

 

(12)  barnard - one of four lanters who mirted there - stiped ravint everyone else. 
 
answer these questions in the answer sheets. 
 
o1. knowing that barnard   s ricktick is more efrimious than radcliffe   s lapsine, identify the antecedent to 
each of the underlined pronouns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*they have a seventh sister named bryn mawr, but she does not factor into this problem. 

  (11) it (second) 

(11) it (first)  

  (11) her   

  (9) she 

  (4) her 

  (1) her 

(1) she 

(7) she 

(5) it 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(o) common sense (2/2) 

o2. given that only one lanter schleems each riplin, list everyone who got to the party in the order that 
they arrived. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

