nlp

text similarity

semantic similarity:

synonymy and other semantic 

relations

synonyms and paraphrases

    example: post-close market announcements

the s&p 500 climbed 6.93, or 0.56 percent, to 1,243.72,        its best close

since june 12, 2001. 

the nasdaq  gained 12.22, or 0.56 percent, to 2,198.44   for its best showing since june 8, 2001.

the djia     rose 68.46, or 0.64 percent, to 10,705.55,    its highest level

since march 15.

synonyms

    different words (and also word compounds) can have 
similar meanings. 
    tepidand lukewarmhave very similar meanings and can be 

substituted for one another (tepid water vs. lukewarm water).

    true synonyms are actually relatively rare. 

    even though bigand largeare often thought of as synonyms, 

consider the difference between big leagues and large 
leagues. j

    the verbs sweatand perspireare also near synonyms. 
    however, they differ in their frequency of use and the type of 

text in which they are likely to appear.

polysemy

    polysemy is the property of words to have 
    for example, the noun bookcan refer to the 

multiple senses.
following:
    a literary work (e.g.,    anna karenina   )
    a stack of pages (e.g., a notebook)
    a record of business transactions (think    bookkeeper   )
    a record of bets (think    bookmaker   )
    a list of buy and sell orders in a financial market

polysemy

    the same word can also have multiple parts of speech, 
each with its own set of senses. for example, the word 
book, as a verb can mean    make a reservation for    or 
   occupy   .
    the different senses of the same word don   t have to be 
equally frequent.
    some of the senses may overlap (e.g., the first two senses 
of bookon the previous slide). that   s partially why 
different dictionaries list different sets of word senses for 
the same word.
       my favorite books are anna karenina and my father   s checkbook    j
    some words can be highly polysemous (e.g., the verb    get    
has at least 35 different meanings, according to id138).

other semantic relations

    antonymy (near opposites) 
    raise-lower
    hypernymy
    a deer is a hypernym for elk
    hyponymy (the inverse of hypernymy)
    membership meronymy: 
    part meronymy: 
    a tablehas legs

    a flockincludes sheep(or birds)

synsets

    semantic relations hold between word senses, not 
    examples:

between words.
    the antonym of hotcan be either mildor cold(or unattractive) 
    the immediate hypernym of barcan be one of the following, 

depending on the specific sense of hot.
among others: room, musical notation, obstruction, 
profession, depending on the sense of bar.
    the term synsetis used to group together all 

synonyms of the same word. if a word is polysemous, 
it may be associated with multiple synsets.

nlp

