nlp

text similarity

entailment and id141

msr paraphrase corpus

1

0

1

0

1

1

0

amrozi accused his brother, whom he called "the witness", of deliberately distorting his evidence.
referring to him as only "the witness", amrozi accused his brother of deliberately distorting his evidence.
yucaipa owned dominick's before selling the chain to safeway in 1998 for $2.5 billion.
yucaipa bought dominick's in 1995 for $693 million and sold it to safeway for $1.8 billion in 1998.
they had published an advertisement on the internet on june 10, offering the cargo for sale, he added.
on june 10, the ship's owners had published an advertisement on the internet, offering the explosives for sale.
around 0335 gmt, tab shares were up 19 cents, or 4.4%, at a$4.56, having earlier set a record high of a$4.57.
tab shares jumped 20 cents, or 4.6%, to set a record closing high at a$4.57.
revenue in the first quarter of the year dropped 15 percent from the same period a year earlier.
with the scandal hanging over stewart's company, revenue the first quarter of the year dropped 15 percent from 
the same period a year earlier.
the dvd-cca then appealed to the state supreme court.
the dvd cca appealed that decision to the u.s. supreme court.
that compared with $35.18 million, or 24 cents per share, in the year-ago period.
earnings were affected by a non-recurring $8 million tax benefit in the year-ago period.

entailment

1
yes

2
no

3
no

4
yes

5
yes
6
no

7
yes
8
no
9
no

the sale was made to pay yukos' us$ 27.5 billion tax bill, yuganskneftegaz was originally sold for us$ 9.4 billion to a little known company baikalfinansgroup which was later bought 
by the russian state-owned oil company rosneft.
baikalfinansgroup was sold to rosneft.
the sale was made to pay yukos' us$ 27.5 billion tax bill, yuganskneftegaz was originally sold for us$9.4 billion to a little known company baikalfinansgroup which was later bought 
by the russian state-owned oil company rosneft
yuganskneftegaz cost us$ 27.5 billion.
loraine besides participating in broadway's dreamgirls, also participated in the off-broadway production of "does a tiger have a necktie". in 1999, loraine went to london, united 
kingdom. there she participated in the production of "rent" where she was cast as "mimi" the understudy.
"does a tiger have a necktie" was produced in london.
"the extra girl" (1923) is a story of a small-town girl, sue graham (played by mabel normand) who comes to hollywood to be in the pictures. this mabel normand vehicle, produced 
by mack sennett, followed earlier films about the film industry and also paved the way for later films about hollywood, such as king vidor's "show people" (1928). 
"the extra girl" was produced by sennett.
a bus collision with a truck in uganda has resulted in at least 30 fatalities and has left a further 21 injured.
30 die in a bus collision in uganda.
take consumer products giant procter and gamble. even with a $1.8 billion research and development budget, it still manages 500 active partnerships each year, many of them with 
small companies.
500 small companies are partners of procter and gamble.
after his release, the clean-shaven magdy el-nashar told reporters outside his home that he had nothing to do with the july 7 transit attacks, which killed 52 people and the four bombers.
52 people and four bombers were killed on july 7
mrs. bush's approval ratings have remained very high, above 80%, even as her husband's have recently dropped below 50%.
80% approve of mr. bush.
recent dakosaurus research comes from a complete skull found in argentina in 1996, studied by diego pol of ohio state university, zulma gasparini of argentinas national university 
of la plata, and their colleagues.
a complete dakosaurus was discovered by diego pol.

entailment and presupposition

    entailment

    one fact follows from another
       all cats have whiskers    and    martin is a cat    entail the 
       martin has whiskers and a tail    entails    martin has whiskers   

statement    martin has whiskers   

       the queen of utopia is dead    presupposes that utopia has a 

    presupposition

queen

entailment and presupposition

    naclo problem from 2010
    author: aleka blackwell
    http://www.nacloweb.org/resources/problems/2010/m.pdf
    http://www.nacloweb.org/resources/problems/2010/ms.pdf

naclo problem

entailment and presupposition

entailment and presupposition

answers

entailment and presupposition

entailment and presupposition

using multiple translations

    the opening sentence of madame bovary by gustave flaubert 
(1857)
    original
    nous   tions    l     tude, quand le proviseur entra, suivi d   un nouveau habill   en 
bourgeois et d   un gar  on de classe qui portait un grand pupitre. ceux qui 
dormaient se r  veill  rent, et chacun s      leva comme surpris dans son travail.
    we were in class when the head-master came in, followed by a "new fellow," 
not wearing the school uniform, and a school servant carrying a large desk. 
those who had been asleep woke up, and every one rose as if just surprised at 
his work.

    translation 1 (eleanor marx-aveling)

    translation 2

    translation 3

    we were in the study-hall when the headmaster entered, followed by a new 
boy not yet in school uniform and by the handy man carrying a large desk.  
their arrival disturbed the slumbers of some of us, but we all stood up in our 
places as though rising from our work.

    we were in the prep.-room when the head came in, followed by a new boy in 
'mufti' and a beadle carrying a big desk. the sleepers aroused themselves, and 
we all stood up, putting on a startled look, as if we had been buried in our 

[barzilay]

dependency representation

[androutsopoulos and malakasiotis 2010]

use in information extraction

[bunescu and mooney 2005]

use in information extraction

[erkan et al. 2007]

using lattices for id141

[figure from androutsopoulos and malakasiotis 2010, based on barzilay and lee 2003]

nlp

