nlp 

introduction to nlp

summarization 

text summarization 

health benefits
      

nutrients
      

eating a diet rich in vegetables and fruits as part of an overall healthy diet may reduce risk for heart disease, including heart attack and 
stroke.
eating a diet rich in some vegetables and fruits as part of an overall healthy diet may protect against certain types of cancers.
diets rich in foods containing fiber, such as some vegetables and fruits, may reduce the risk of heart disease, obesity, and type 2 
diabetes.
eating vegetables and fruits rich in potassium as part of an overall healthy diet may lower blood pressure, and may also reduce the risk 
of developing kidney stones and help to decrease bone loss.
eating foods such as vegetables that are lower in calories per cup instead of some other higher-calorie food may be useful in helping to 
lower calorie intake.
most vegetables are naturally low in fat and calories. none have cholesterol. (sauces or seasonings may add fat, calories, or 
cholesterol.)
vegetables are important sources of many nutrients, including potassium, dietary fiber, folate (folic acid), vitamin a, and vitamin c.
diets rich in potassium may help to maintain healthy blood pressure. vegetable sources of potassium include sweet potatoes, white 
potatoes, white beans, tomato products (paste, sauce, and juice), beet greens, soybeans, lima beans, spinach, lentils, and kidney beans.
dietary fiber from vegetables, as part of an overall healthy diet, helps reduce blood cholesterol levels and may lower risk of heart 
disease. fiber is important for proper bowel function. it helps reduce constipation and diverticulosis. fiber-containing foods such as 
vegetables help provide a feeling of fullness with fewer calories.
folate (folic acid) helps the body form red blood cells. women of childbearing age who may become pregnant should consume 
adequate folate from foods, and in addition 400 mcg of synthetic folic acid from fortified foods or supplements. this reduces the risk 
of neural tube defects, spina bifida, and anencephaly during fetal development.
vitamin a keeps eyes and skin healthy and helps to protect against infections.
vitamin c helps heal cuts and wounds and keeps teeth and gums healthy. vitamin c aids in iron absorption.

      
      

      

      

      
      

      

      

      
      

summary 

eating vegetables is 
healthy.

news summarization 

book summaries 

       cliff   s notes
       book a minute (http://www.rinkworks.com/bookaminute/)

       which book is this?

(some boys crash on an island.) 
ralph we need a fire. (they make a fire. it goes out.) 
ralph we need a fire. (they make a fire. it goes out.) 
ralph we need a fire.  
jack forget the fire. let's kill each other.  
other boys yeah! (they do.)  
the end 

ultra-condensed by david j. parker and samuel stoddard 

movie summaries 

       titanic

       beginning with genuine footage of the departure of the titanic on 

its fateful voyage, this epic movie tells the events of that tragic 
night from the perspective of fictional survivor rose. as an old 
lady of 100 she recounts her story of duty, love and disaster to a 
salvage crew searching for a lost gem.
       winner of 11 oscars, james cameron's effects-driven blockbuster 
puts a human face on a tragedy of epic proportions by wedding 
the historical tale of the doomed ocean liner with a fictional 
romance between two of the ship's ill-fated passengers. society 
girl rose dewitt bukate and penniless artist jack dawson struggle 
to survive both the sinking ship -- and the wrath of rose's 
wealthy fianc  .

search engine snippets 

genres of summaries 

       headlines
       outlines
       minutes
       biographies
       abridgments
       sound bites
       movie summaries
       chronologies, etc.

[mani and maybury 1999] 

types of summaries 

input
      
       output
       purpose
       form

       indicative, informative, and critical summaries
       extracts (representative paragraphs/sentences/phrases)
       abstracts:    a concise summary of the central subject 

matter of a document    [paice90].

       dimensions
       context

       single-document vs. multi-document
       query-specific vs. generic

stages of summarization 

       three stages (typically)
       content identification
       conceptual organization
       realization

baghdad, iraq (id98) 6 july 2004  -- three u.s. marines have died in al anbar province west of baghdad, 
the coalition public information center said tuesday. 
according to cpic, "two marines assigned to [1st] marine expeditionary force were killed in action and one 
marine died of wounds received in action monday in the al anbar province while conducting security and 
stability operations.    
al anbar province -- a hotbed for iraqi insurgents -- includes the restive cities of ramadi and fallujah and runs 
to the syrian and jordanian borders. 
meanwhile, officials said eight people died monday in a u.s. air raid on a house in fallujah that american 
commanders said was used to harbor islamic militants. 
a senior u.s. military official told id98 the target was a group of people suspected of planning suicide attacks 
using vehicles. 
the strike was the latest in a series of raids on the city to target what u.s. military spokesmen have called 
safehouses for the network led by fugitive islamic militant leader abu musab al-zarqawi. 
a statement from allawi said: "the people of iraq will not tolerate terrorist groups or those who collaborate with 
any other foreign fighters such as the zarqawi network to continue their wicked ways. 
"the sovereign nation of iraq and our international partners are committed to stopping terrorism and will 
continue to hunt down these evil terrorists and weed them out, one by one. i call upon all iraqis to close ranks 
and report to the authorities on the activities of these criminal cells.    
american planes dropped two 1,000-pound bombs and four 500-pound bombs on the house about 7:15 p.m. 
(11:15 a.m. et), according to a statement from the u.s.-led multi-national force-iraq. 
at least four previous air raids have targeted suspected zarqawi safehouses in fallujah. 

baghdad, iraq (id98) 6 july 2004  -- three u.s. marines have died in al anbar province west of baghdad, 
the coalition public information center said tuesday. 
according to cpic, "two marines assigned to [1st] marine expeditionary force were killed in action and one 
marine died of wounds received in action monday in the al anbar province while conducting security and 
stability operations.    
al anbar province -- a hotbed for iraqi insurgents -- includes the restive cities of ramadi and fallujah and runs 
to the syrian and jordanian borders. 
meanwhile, officials said eight people died monday in a u.s. air raid on a house in fallujah that american 
commanders said was used to harbor islamic militants. 
a senior u.s. military official told id98 the target was a group of people suspected of planning suicide attacks 
using vehicles. 
the strike was the latest in a series of raids on the city to target what u.s. military spokesmen have called 
safehouses for the network led by fugitive islamic militant leader abu musab al-zarqawi. 
a statement from allawi said: "the people of iraq will not tolerate terrorist groups or those who collaborate with 
any other foreign fighters such as the zarqawi network to continue their wicked ways. 
"the sovereign nation of iraq and our international partners are committed to stopping terrorism and will 
continue to hunt down these evil terrorists and weed them out, one by one. i call upon all iraqis to close ranks 
and report to the authorities on the activities of these criminal cells.    
american planes dropped two 1,000-pound bombs and four 500-pound bombs on the house about 7:15 p.m. 
(11:15 a.m. et), according to a statement from the u.s.-led multi-national force-iraq. 
at least four previous air raids have targeted suspected zarqawi safehouses in fallujah. 

human summarization and abstracting 
       what professional abstractors do
       ashworth (1973):

          to take an original article, understand it and pack it neatly 
into a nutshell without loss of substance or clarity presents a 
challenge which many have felt worth taking up for the joys 
of achievement alone. these are the characteristics of an art 
form   .

extractive summarization 

       selecting units of the original text

       usually sentences
       no simplification
       no rewriting

       baseline

       extract the first few sentences

nlp 

