                           multi-id91 datasets

   this page is a distribution site for the multi-id91 datasets, a
   subset of which were introduced in the following papers:
   [1]mining id91 dimensions.
   sajib dasgupta and vincent ng.
   in the proceedings of the international conference on machine learning
   (icml), 2010.
   [2]towards subjectifying text id91.
   sajib dasgupta and vincent ng.
   in the proceedings of the acm sigir conference on research and
   development in information retrieval, 2010.
   while traditional work on text id91 has largely focused on
   grouping documents by topic, it is conceivable that a user may want to
   cluster documents along other dimensions, such as the author's mood,
   gender, age or sentiment. this is useful as users often have a single
   id91 along a particular dimension in mind, but the fact that
   there could be 'alternative' ways to cluster the data may provide her
   important insights which were otherwise missing and could potentially
   be valuable.
   motivated in part by this observation, we take a multifaceted approach
   to document annotation: we annotate a set of documents across multiple
   dimensions, where each dimension represents a particular classification
   structure along which the document set can be meaningfully categorized.
   we use the annotations as a gold-standard to evaluate an alternative
   (or multi-) id91 system, which seeks to organize, or cluster, a
   set of text documents along multiple dimensions.
   for example, given a collection of reviews we annotate it along the
   following four dimensions:
    1. sentiment:
       classify a review as positive (thumbs up) or negative (thumbs
       down).
    2. topic:
       classify a review according to the product description or the topic
       it pertains to. for example, classify a review according to whether
       it's a book, movie, or an electronic product review.
    3. subjectivity:
       classify a review according to whether the review contains mostly a
       narrative description of the product and is therefore largely
       "objective", or whether it contains mostly the author's opinion and
       is therefore largely "subjective".
    4. strength:
       classify a review according to whether the opinion expressed in a
       review is "strong" or "weak".

   thus a particular review labeled as {"positive", "movie", "subjective",
   "strong"} permeates four different pieces of information to the end
   user: the review is positive sentiment bearing and related to a movie,
   it's mostly subjective and the strength of the opinion expressed in the
   review is strong.
   annotation guidelines and other details regarding id91 dimensions
   for each dataset can be found in the papers listed above. for any
   reference to the multi-id91 datasets and the corresponding
   annotations please cite the icml paper above. we collected the datasets
   from numerous sources, which are listed along with a reference paper
   and a web-source in the corresponding folder. please cite the source(s)
   for any reference to the dataset(s).

  datasets:

   [3]download multi-id91 datasets

  directions to use the datasets:

   [4]guideline

references

   1. http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/~sajib/icml2010-sajib-vince.pdf
   2. http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/~sajib/sigir-sajib-vince.ps
   3. http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/~sajib/multifacetedtext.zip
   4. http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/~sajib/guideline-multifacetedtextclassification.txt
