tutorial on universal dependencies
making use of ud in nlp and linguistics

joakim nivre1 daniel zeman2

filip ginter3

francis m. tyers45

1department of linguistics and philology, uppsala university, sweden

2institute of formal and applied linguistics, charles university in prague, czech republic

3department of information technology, university of turku, finland

4giela ja kultuvrra instituhtta, uit norgga   rktala   universitehta, troms  , norway

5arvutiteaduse instituut, tartu   likool, estonia

parsing

    monolingual parsing

    benchmarking for many different languages
    off-the-shelf models:

    udpipe
    syntaxnet

    cross-lingual parsing

    usually motivated by a low-resource scenario
    three main approaches

    annotation projection (hwa et al., 2002)
    model transfer (zeman and resnik, 2008)
    treebank translation (tiedemann et al., 2014)

    universal parsing

    a single model for all languages (ammar et al., 2016)

1

cross-lingual parsing

2

cross-lingual parsing

2

cross-lingual parsing

tiedemann (2015) cross-lingual id33
with universal dependencies and predicted pos labels

    three methods for cross-lingual id33
    the impact of not having gold part-of-speech tags
    reveals weaknesses of delexicalized model transfer

3

universal parsing

ammar et al. (2016) many languages, one parser

    parsing with multiple source and target languages
    multilingual id27s and typological features
    gain on    small    languages without loss on    big    languages

4

need more data?

wang and eisner (2016) the galactic dependencies treebanks: getting

more data by synthesizing new languages

    synthesizing treebanks for new (potential) natural languages
    reorder n- and/or v-dependents in l1 with model trained on l2

5

id29

reddy et al. (2016) transforming dependency structures

to logical forms for id29

6

id29

7

cross-lingual id27s

vuli   (2017) cross-lingual syntactically informed

distributed word representations

    cross-lingual ud-parsed corpora (using bilingual lexicon)
    evaluated on word similarity and bilingual lexicon induction
    outperforms cross-lingual/no syntax and monolingual/syntax

8

linguistic typology

futrell et al. (2015) quantifying word order

freedom in dependency corpora

    word order freedom = conditional id178 of order given tree
    test hypotheses about case marking and word order freedom

9

linguistic typology

10

linguistic typology

  stling (2015) word order typology through

id73 alignment

    word order study based on bible translations (986 languages)
    massively parallel alignment and ud annotation projection
    evaluation against wals for a subset of languages

11

is ud really suitable for all it is used for?

11

manning   s law

the secret to understanding the design of ud is to realize that it is a
very subtle compromise between approximately 6 things:
1. ud needs to be satisfactory for analysis of individual languages.
2. ud needs to be good for linguistic typology.
3. ud must be suitable for rapid, consistent annotation.
4. ud must be suitable for computer parsing with high accuracy.
5. ud must be easily comprehended and used by a non-linguist.
6. ud must provide good support for downstream nlp tasks.
it   s easy to come up with a proposal that improves ud on one of
these dimensions. the interesting and difficult part is to improve
ud while remaining sensitive to all these dimensions.

12

questions?

12

