li fei-fei, stanford 
rob fergus, nyu 

antonio torralba, mit 

testimonials:    since i attended this course, i can recognize all the objects that i see     

why do we care about recognition? 
perception of function: we can perceive the 3d 

shape, texture, material properties, without 
knowing about objects. but, the concept of 
category encapsulates also information about 
what can we do with those objects.  

   we therefore include the perception of function as a proper    indeed, crucial- subject
 for vision science   , from vision science, chapter 9, palmer. 

the perception of function 

       direct perception (affordances): gibson 

flat surface 
horizontal 
knee-high 
    

sittable 
upon 

       mediated perception (categorization) 

flat surface 
horizontal 
knee-high 
    

chair 

sittable 
upon 

chair  chair 

chair? 

direct perception 

some aspects of an object function can be 

perceived directly 

       functional form: some forms clearly 
indicate to a function (   sittable-upon   , 
container,  cutting device,    ) 
sittable-upon  sittable-upon 

it does not seem easy 
to  sit-upon this    

sittable-upon 

direct perception 

some aspects of an object function can be 

perceived directly 

       observer relativity: function is observer 

dependent 

from http://lastchancerescueflint.org 

limitations of direct perception 

objects of similar structure might have very different functions 

not all functions seem to be available from direct visual information only. 

the functions are the same at some level of description: we can put things
 inside in both and somebody will come later to empty them. however, we
 are not expected to put inside the same kinds of things    

limitations of direct perception 
visual appearance might be a very weak cue to function 

propulsion system 
strong protective surface 
something that looks like a door 
sure, i can travel to space on
 this object 

how do we achieve mediated 

perception? 

well    this requires object recognition (for 

more details, see entire course) 

object recognition 
is it really so hard? 

find the chair in this image  

output of normalized correlation 

this is a chair 

object recognition 
is it really so hard? 

find the chair in this image  

pretty much garbage 

simple template matching is not going to make it 

object recognition 
is it really so hard? 

find the chair in this image  

a    popular method is that of template matching, by point to point correlation of a 
model pattern with the image pattern. these techniques are inadequate for three-
dimensional scene analysis for many reasons, such as occlusion, changes in viewing 
angle, and articulation of parts.    nivatia & binford, 1977. 

and it can get a lot harder 

brady, m. j., & kersten, d. (2003). bootstrapped learning of novel objects. j vis, 3(6), 413-422  

your visual system is amazing 

is your visual system amazing? 

discover the camouflaged object 

brady, m. j., & kersten, d. (2003). bootstrapped learning of novel objects. j vis, 3(6), 413-422  

discover the camouflaged object 

brady, m. j., & kersten, d. (2003). bootstrapped learning of novel objects. j vis, 3(6), 413-422  

any guesses? 

outline 

1. introduction (15   ) 

2. single object categories (1h15   ) 

            - bag of words (rob) 
            - part-based (rob) 
            - discriminative (rob) 
            - detecting single objects in contexts (antonio) 
            - 3d object classes (fei-fei) 

15:30     16:00 coffee break 

3. multiple object categories (1h30   ) 

            - recognizing a large number of objects (rob) 
            - recognizing multiple objects in an image (antonio) 
            - objects and annotations (fei-fei) 

4. object-related datasets and challenges (30   )  

