 

lexical semantics in formal semantics: 

history and challenges 

 
. 
 
 
 

barbara h. partee  

partee@linguist.umass.edu 

esslli refsemplus workshop, august 2016 

1.  introduction 

n       the early important achievements of formal semantics that made it 
of interest to linguists were in compositionality, i.e.    the semantics of 
syntax   . 

n       the parts of the lexicon that received serious attention were the 

parts most directly relevant to compositionality. 

n       there was rapid progress on a wide range of function words or 

morphemes and the constructions in which they occur -- 
determiners, especially quantifiers, tense and aspect markers, 
plurality, negation, focus-sensitive words like only and even, 
comparative and superlative morphemes, and more.  

n       but for open-class content words, as is well-known, montague 

assigned semantic types, but did not try to specify their meanings, 
considering their study an empirical matter outside of formal 
semantics. they were just treated as unanalyzed constants, as in 
formal logic, to be assigned values by interpretation in a model. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

2 

introduction, cont   d. 
n       over the course of the history of formal semantics, there has been 
great progress on the study of some semantic properties of open-
class words, including aspectual properties of verbs, context-
sensitive properties of words like local and enemy, polarity items, 
functional and relational nouns, mass nouns, and more.  

n       these properties have sometimes been captured via meaning 
postulates     constraints on their interpretation in a model --, a 
practice used by montague (from carnap), sometimes via partial 
lexical decomposition, a practice introduced by david dowty on the 
model of what was done in generative semantics. 

n       lexical semantic research within formal semantics all concerns 
properties that are crucial in semantic composition; these lexical 
studies have been driven by the goals of id152.  
n       what has remained unanalyzed is the    remainder    of the content of 
open-class words; those are still treated by most formal semanticists 
as unanalyzed primitives.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

3 

introduction, cont   d. 

n       the issue of whether and how to try to add a fuller treatment of 

lexical content to formal semantics has a complex history which i will 
discuss, but was a side issue until very recently. 
it still draws less attention within theoretical circles than it does in 
the context of cognitive and computational perspectives.  

n      

n       there are theoreticians who explicitly defend the idea of leaving the 
   remainder    of the meaning of lexical items unanalyzed linguistically. 
n       and the status of lexical meaning has figured in some major debates 

about semantic theory. 

n       many of chomsky   s critiques of formal semantics are based on a 
consideration of lexical items that have meaning but don   t seem to 
refer to anything (chances in take chances, etc). chomsky seems 
skeptical of anything semantic beyond a syntactic level of    logical 
form   .  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

4 

introduction, cont   d. 
n       and on the other side, putnam   s classic argument for the claim that 
   meanings aren   t in the head    was based on words that act like rigid 
designators, like water and other natural kind terms. putnam argued 
for a strongly non-psychologistic basis for some kinds of lexical 
meaning     cases where there seems to be only reference. 

n       those who consider the lexicon outside the realm of formal (or 

other) semantics tend not to think of it as part of linguistics at all, but 
rather part of a more general cognitive domain, perhaps part of 
general knowledge, not so modularly encapsulated as    truly 
linguistic    knowledge.  

n       but even if one agrees with montague   s initial supposition that 

lexical semantics is a separate empirical field of study, and whether 
one calls it    linguistic    or not, it would of course be a major advance 
if we could understand what human lexical understanding is like and 
how it interfaces with the construction of sentence meaning and 
discourse interpretation. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

5 

introduction, cont   d. 
plan of the rest of the talk: 
n       2. semantic competence issues. what are the goals of    doing 

semantics   ? what counts as success? and is there a difference 
between describing a person   s language and describing their 
competence in that language? these issues loom largest for lexical 
semantics, i believe. 

n       3. some history. lexical semantics before and in the beginnings of 

formal semantics. approaches and disputes. 

n       4. some achievements of formal semantics in the realm of lexical 

semantics, empirical achievements that don   t require resolving 
foundational questions. 

n       5. meaning postulates     some of their appeal, and how they connect 
to some early theories and possibly to id65, and 
how they may avoid some theoretical pitfalls. 
(6. four areas of theoretical progress) 

n      

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

6 

2. semantic competence issues 
n       chomsky brought the notion of competence to the fore, and made it 
central to the goals of syntax, and by extension presumably to all of 
linguistics. 

n       but for semantics, especially lexical semantics, it   s not obvious that 

the unconscious knowledge of the native speaker actually 
characterizes the language they speak, as it seems to do so neatly 
in syntax.  
in syntax, if two speakers differ in their internalized syntactic rules, 
then we say that they speak different idiolects. there is no such 
thing as    not knowing    the syntactic rules of your language     what 
you know defines what your language is.  

n      

n       the syntax of the    language of a community    is perhaps a more 

problematic notion than the syntax of an idiolect, a kind of 
idealization, or else requiring an explicit account of variation. 

n       and in syntax, even in the lexicon there are no worries-in-principle     

the lexicon is finite, and at worst can be memorized.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

7 

semantic competence issues, cont   d. 

n      

in semantics, on the other hand, some of 
the biggest worries about    competence    
have concerned the lexicon 

n       putnam 1975:    so theory of meaning came 
to rest on two unchallenged assumptions: 
(i) that knowing the meaning of a term is just 
a matter of being in a certain psychological 
state. 
(ii) that the meaning of a term (in the sense of 
   intension   ) determines its extension (in the 
sense that sameness of intension determines 
sameness of extension.) 
i shall argue that these two assumptions are 
not jointly satisfied by any notion, let alone any 
notion of meaning.     

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

8 

semantic competence issues, cont   d. 
n       putnam used his famous twin earth thought experiments to argue 

that nothing in the narrow psychological state of a language user 
determines that water is h2o rather than xyz.  yet given the causal 
history of the term in english, water in fact picks out h2o in our 
language.  

n       and putnam argued that even though he could not tell a beech from 

an elm, beech and elm in his language did not both just    mean    
   some deciduous tree   , but rather picked out the natural kinds 
   beech    and    elm   , by virtue of his being a part of a language 
community with a certain history.  
in both kinds of examples, the words pick out determinate kinds; 
they have a definite intension (rigid) and extension, but these are 
not determined by whatever    semantic representation    may be in the 
speaker   s head, not by the speaker   s    unconscious knowledge   . 

n      

n       there are no comparable problems in syntax!  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

9 

semantic competence issues, cont   d. 
n       putnam   s arguments and related concerns about the lexicon led me 
to conclude in some earlier papers (1977-1982, around the time of 
the early interdisciplinary cognitive science interactions in the 
   sloan years   ) that we really don   t know our language. 

n      

n       that didn   t seem terrible, though, just interestingly different from the 

situation in syntax.  
i related it to the theory-dependence of lexical meanings, the role of 
   experts    (for beech-elm, etc,),    meaning holism   , meaning change 
over time. it also relates to the much greater interpersonal 
differences we find  in lexical semantics than in syntax or phonology.  
n       my conclusion was that our knowledge of meanings of many words 
we use is incomplete and underspecified. (in some but not all cases, 
the meanings themselves may be underspecified, partly    open   .)  
n       for an example of such indeterminacy and change happening in 

(not only) english right now, consider husband and wife. (mary and i 
are wives may now be ambiguous     cf     mothers vs.     sisters.)  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

10 

semantic competence issues, cont   d. 
n       an alternative view: a historically major opposition point of view 

within linguistics (jackendoff, fodor): meanings should be thought 
of as something like mental concepts, perhaps in some innate 
language of thought. this was a highly    internalist    picture.  

n       even though that view did not have the particular problems that 

model-theoretic semantics did, i worried that it completely neglected 
an important higher-order intention in language users, namely to 
speak the same language as each other. (cf. david lewis   s 
convention). our words don   t simply refer to    our ideas   .  

n       go back to putnam   s observation that he could not tell a beech from 

an elm, and hence had no    internal       semantic features    or 
   concepts    that would differentiate them    in his head   . that did not 
mean that beech and elm were synonymous for him. he knew 
nothing    about    them, but having acquired the words as he did, they 
picked out different kinds. and he believed beeches and elms to be 
different kinds without being able to describe any difference.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

11 

semantic competence issues, cont   d. 
n       one promising resolution to the 
foundational tension between chomskyan 
psychologism and formal semantics comes 
from recent arguments by stalnaker and 
burge about the need to revise what we take 
psychological realism to be. 
n       putnam    75:    meanings ain   t in the head   .  
n       stalnaker 1989: meanings are in the head, 
but like footprints are in the sand: the 
problem was in taking too narrow a view of 
   in the head   .  
n      

       a representational system is a system 
that is capable of being in a range of 
alternative internal states that tend to be 
causally dependent on the environment in 
a systematic way.    

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

12 

semantic competence issues, cont   d. 
n       similarly in the context of work on the 

philosophy of perception, on    social anti-
individualism   , and on the origins of 
objectivity (2010), tyler burge has argued 
that chomsky   s view of grammar    in the 
mind    underestimates the degree to which 
   the natures of many mental states 
constitutively depend on relations between 
a subject matter beyond the individual that 
has the mental states.    

n       stalnaker   s and burge   s work suggests that 

we should combine work on individual 
semantic representations with much more 
research on how those representations 
come to have the external relational content 
that makes reference possible.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

13 

semantic competence issues, cont   d. 

n       conclusion: the apparent tensions between formal semantics and 
the goals of a linguistic theory of the competence of the language 
user were only apparent.  

n       perception involves a relation between perceiver and external 

objective reality. perception is normally veridical but can be in error. 
n       reference and truth conditions involve a relation between language 
user and external reality. language is normally understood correctly 
but the language user can be mistaken.  

n       language of course goes beyond objective representation; not all 

language is about the real world. no one suggests that truth-
conditions exhaust all of meaning; but the puzzle of how to relate 
truth-conditional semantics to semantic competence is resolvable, 
and cognitive science is becoming the richer for it. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

14 

3. lexical semantics in antecedents to formal 
semantics. 
 n       leibniz (1646-1716) articulated the goal of a    characteristica 
universalis    as part of his goal of designing a logically perfect 
language: one basic symbol for every basic concept, and everything 
built up compositionally from there. of course never achieved, but 
that idea has great appeal and is frequently reborn.  

n       20th century logicians: strictly id152, with primitive 
constant symbols at the base     they are assigned values in a model. 

n       as early linguists thinking about semantics, fodor and katz in the 

1960s posited universal semantic features on analogy with 
phonology. primitive ideas about compositionality     union of sets of 
features.  

n       generative semanticists in the 60s and 70s added logical structure 

(based on 1st order logic) and a certain amount of semantic 
decomposition     e.g. cause(become(not(alive))).  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

15 

lexical semantics in antecedents, cont   d.  

n       anna wierzbicka is probably the 

most persistent proponent of a set of 
universal semantic primes from 
which all lexical meanings can be 
composed, and she has done a lot 
of interesting typological work on 
that basis. but in general that 
approach is not considered likely to 
succeed as a general theory of 
lexical meaning. 

n       but see avery andrews   s interesting 

work in progress, andrews, avery. 2015. 
reconciling nsm and formal semantics 
(v4). ms. 
http://www.semanticsarchive.net/
archive/2yxmmiwn/
nsm_formal_semantics_v4.pdf. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

16 

lexical semantics in antecedents, cont   d.  

n       carnap introduced meaning 

postulates as non-logical 
axioms that could guarantee 
the validity of various intuitively 
valid arguments that didn   t 
follow by logic alone.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

17 

lexical semantics in antecedents, cont   d.  

n       montague included some 
meaning postulates in his 
work, constraining which 
logically possible interpreted 
models could be models for 
english. i will say more about 
that approach in section 5. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

18 

lexical semantics in antecedents, cont   d.  

n       philosophers    reactions to linguists    

   semantic representations    as a way of 
doing semantics     david lewis (1970):  

n          but we can know the markerese 

translation of an english sentence without 
knowing the first thing about the meaning 
of the english sentence: namely, the 
conditions under which it would be true. 
semantics with no treatment of truth 
conditions is not semantics.     

n          translation into markerese is at best a 

substitute for real semantics, relying 
either on our tacit competence (at some 
future date) as speakers of markerese or 
on our ability to do real semantics at least 
for the one language markerese.    

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

19 

lexical semantics in antecedents, cont   d.  
n       but linguists did presuppose tacit competence in markerese; they 
took it     or some kind of representation language -- to be universal 
and innate, and many still do (e.g. jackendoff; also jerry fodor).  

n       to philosophers and logicians doing formal semantics, the language 

of markerese looked empty, since it was uninterpreted. 

n       to linguists in 1970, concern with truth looked puzzling. linguists 

were trying to figure out mental representations that would underlie 
linguistic competence.  

n       when the linguistic relevance of truth conditions finally penetrated, 
the nature of linguistic semantics changed, in terms of tools used, 
questions asked, and criteria of adequacy for semantic analyses. 

n       looking forward: possible reconciliation if evolution can provide 

some of the external referential links needed to give    innate 
semantic features    the kind of external grounding lewis demanded, 
and if learning mechanisms can be found to account for the external 
content of non-innate semantic features or morphemes.   

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

20 

4. empirical achievements of formal semantics in 
lexical semantics 
 n       formal semantics has actually made a great many contributions to 

lexical semantics, even without any general theory of lexical 
semantics.  

n       as noted in the introduction, the emphasis has been on points of 
interface between lexical content and compositionality. and what 
has been studied has been certain aspects of lexical meaning, not 
lexical meanings as a whole. 

n       as a prime early example, take the study of verbal aspect, starting 

with early work by dowty, bennett and partee, bach, parsons.  

n       the driving challenge was to account for the compositional 

interpretation of sentences including various tenses and temporal 
adverbials, including entailments that had been catalogued by zeno 
vendler, such as  john is walking       john has walked but not john 
is building a house       john has built a house.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

21 

empirical achievements, cont   d. 
n       the different entailment patterns between john is walking and john 
is building a house evidently reflect the different aksionsarten of the 
verbs walk and build: one is a process verb, the other an 
accomplishment verb.  

n       early work analyzed these aspectual properties of verbs of different 
aksionsarten     states, processes, achievements, accomplishments, 
and was able to offer accounts of much of their compositional 
behavior with tenses, auxiliary verbs, temporal modifiers.  

n       at first all in terms of times     moments and intervals     without taking 
events as primitives in the ontology. but already much progress on 
semantics of perfect, progressive, for an hour vs. in an hour, etc. 
n       for instance, suppose build a house is true of an interval, and be 

building a house true at any moment in the interior of such an 
interval, and have built a house true at any moment following such 
an interval. that   s enough to explain the non-entailment we noted 
betweejn john is building a house and john has built a house.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

22 

empirical achievements, cont   d. 
n       great progress in ensuing decades. incorporating events 

(eventualities) into models as well as times (parsons, bach). 
analyzing telicity, (im)perfectivity, and distinguishing them (filip). 
incorporating reichenbachian distinctions among event time, 
reference time, and speech time (w. klein). 

n       shortly after link and sharvy revolutionized the study of the mass-

count distinction in nouns and the semantics of plurals, their 
algebraic perspective was extended to the event domain by bach 
and by link. this    subatomic    (parsons) analysis of entities and 
events opened up more fine-grained semantic analysis of nouns and 
verbs     while still leaving unanalyzed the    lexical remainder    
distinguishing lexical items whose nominal or aspectual profiles 
were the same. no analysis of dog vs cat or walk vs run.  

n       but those advances in turn led to new insights into the interaction of 

aspect and quantification involving verbs, their arguments with 
various thematic roles, and temporal modifiers (dowty, krifka, filip).  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

23 

empirical achievements, cont   d. 
n      

in recent decades, work on fine-grained event structure in the 
semantics of tense, aspect, and temporal modification has been 
enriched by typological work and by exciting work on language 
acquisition and language processing, reinforcing the    psychological 
reality    of the posited semantic properties.  
in those domains and others, progress in lexical semantics and 
progress in id152 have gone hand in hand.  

n      

n       and none of it has been impeded by the lack of an account of lexical 

semantics    in general   .  

n       all of it, i believe, has been pretty much consistent with either of two 

approaches i mentioned in the introduction:  
q       studying    semantic properties    of lexical units (captured for 

instance by meaning postulates), or  

q       doing    partial decomposition   , identifying    functional heads    or 

   operators    with specified properties, applied in a structured way 
to the (unanalyzed) meaning of a given root lexical item.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

24 

empirical achievements, cont   d. 

n      

n      

i have focused on formal semantic achievements concerning verbs 
and nouns, and could also mention much work on adjectives, 
because this work concerns the open-class vocabulary, the part of 
the lexicon where formal semantics has the least to say, and no 
general theory.  
i   ve done this partly in reaction to my own field: i have often worried 
about the absence of a theory of lexical meaning, and have worried 
about the tendency of formal semanticists to endorse montague   s 
practice of leaving lexical semantics outside of    semantics proper   , 
possibly outside of    linguistics proper    (and in that respect to partially  
side with chomsky   s skepticism towards    real semantics   .)  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

25 

empirical achievements, cont   d. 
n       but i shouldn   t neglect to at least mention some of the achievements 

on formal semantics   s    home turf   , such as the semantics of 
quantifiers (montague, barwise and cooper, keenan,    ), and one 
of my favorites, the semantics of cross-categorial conjunction 
(dowty, gazdar, partee and rooth).  

n       the semantics of cross-categorial conjunction     and and or 

connecting sentences, dps, vps, adjps, and more     has turned out 
to be systematic and universal (universal allowing for a finite number 
of marked exceptions in any language).  
in this case the semantic analysis of the given lexical items is 
complete analysis: these are closed-class items whose content is 
entirely    logical   .  

n      

n       montague included analysis of and connecting s   s and vps (not of 
nps only because he wasn   t ready to deal with plurals). dowty et al 
generalized what montague had done to cover all    boolean 
conjoinable categories   .  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

26 

empirical achievements, cont   d. 
n       upshot: conjunction seems to be a universal and distinct    module    

of the grammar. both in syntax and in semantics its properties seem 
to be special and universal.  

n       of course even with conjunction the story is not complete.    or    is 

more puzzling than    and    (simons) and work on it continues. 
interaction with negation and other scope-bearing elements is non-
trivial. the relation between    boolean    and and    group-forming    and 
is also non-trivial (winter).  

n       but the cross-categorial semantics of boolean and is well-enough 

understood and robust that it can be employed as one test for 
evaluating analyses of various constructions, as for instance to 
argue in favor of <e,t> type for dps in predicative positions, where 
they can be conjoined with aps. (john is intelligent and an authority 
on unicorns.)  

n       conclusion: formal semantics has made contributions to aspects of 

lexical meaning, even without a theory of lexical meaning. 

 
august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

27 

5. about meaning postulates  

n       the use of meaning postulates in montague   s work seems 

somewhat ad hoc, and rather few semanticists have advocated such 
an approach in general (but see borschev and partee 1998.) 

n       ede zimmermann in a 1999 paper demonstrated the danger of 

trying to use them to get around certain kinds of compositionality 
problems, showing that they must be used with caution.  

n       but i believe that meaning postulates can be a very useful resource 

for lexical semantics for at least two reasons. 

n       first, from within the perspective of formal semantics, with the goal 
of doing something about lexical semantics. if you don   t believe in, 
or are agnostic about, the existence of some set of universal 
semantic primitives, then the possibility of actually giving complete 
and non-circular definitions for all words is impossible. similarly, 
insofar as the interpretation of some words is presumed to be at 
least in part a matter of reference (cf. beech and elm), we may lack 
a metalanguage in which to    give    that reference. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

28 

about meaning postulates, cont   d.  

n       but meaning postulates are a way to constrain, i.e. partially specify, 

lexical meanings without claiming to provide definitions. 

n       montague didn   t use the word    meaning postulates    for the ones he 
provided     he simply called them    constraints on possible models    
that were to count as models of english. without them, any lexical 
item whose interpretation was not spelled out explicitly (for him, 
those were be, and, or, not, will, have    en, necessarily, and perhaps 
a few more) could in principle be given any model-theoretic 
interpretation of the appropriate semantic type. 

n       some of his meaning postulates specified logical properties of some 

lexical items. e.g., in the general case, all argument-taking 
expressions took intensional arguments -- for example, all transitive 
verbs were given the semantic type appropriate for seek, taking the 
intension of a generalized quantifier as object. then he used 
meaning postulates to state that some of the transitive verbs have 
meanings that amount to first-order extensional relations.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

29 

about meaning postulates, cont   d.  
n       other meaning postulates were of a sort very relevant to the general 

issue of lexical semantics. these were meaning postulates that 
established word-to-word or word-to-phrase connections, 
guaranteeing the non-independence of various word meanings. 
n       an example from ptq is a meaning postulate guaranteeing the 

equivalence of seek and try to find, which he used in order to show 
the equivalence of his treatment of seek as a basic transitive verb 
with a quinean decompositional treatment of seek into try to find. 

n       one can also use meaning postulates to specify lexical entailments 

of the    is a    sort among subordinate-superordinate predicates, or 
converse relations among words like employer, employee, or to 
specify that some relational words like cousin are symmetrical. 

n       assuming that the metalanguage for expressing meaning postulates 
is rich enough to distinguish presuppositions from entailments, they 
can also be used to specify the sortal requirements of argument-
taking words, given that those are presumably presuppositional. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

30 

about meaning postulates, cont   d.  
n      

in general, almost any clauses that might be part of a lexical entry in 
an ordinary monolingual dictionary could be rephrased as meaning 
postulates, constraining the interpretation of the head word to be 
compatible with the interpretation of the given clauses.  

n       thus meaning postulates can be viewed as something like    modest 
partial definitions   , modest in two ways: (i) they don   t pretend to be 
exhaustive or complete definitions, and (ii) they generally connect 
words to words (or sometimes to logic), not to external reality.  

n       and one would want a metalanguage for meaning postulates rich 
enough to include indexical and demonstrative elements, so as to 
be able to say, for instance, that this afternoon is part of today, etc. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

31 

about meaning postulates, cont   d.  

n       the second reason that meaning postulates may be useful is 

especiallly relevant in the context of this workshop. distributional 
semantics, from the little i know about it, does not try to say anything 
about reference, but treats lexical semantics in terms of the 
distribution of words in texts, going back to zellig harris   s 
observation that similarity of cooccurence generally corresponds to 
similarity of menaing (as well as to similarity of syntactic category).  
n       meaning postulates, at least prototypical ones, also relate words to 

words. they might thus be able to provide some sort of bridge 
between formal semantics and id65. i don   t think 
it would be a very direct bridge, given that distributional vectors 
involve numbers that specify some kind of similarity metrics, and 
familiar sorts of meaning postulates do not say anything about 
   similarity   .  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

32 

about meaning postulates, cont   d.  

n       but both meaning postulates and id65 relate 

expressions to expressions, constraining reference without actually 
specifying reference. 

n       the methods of both can, i think, be easily adapted to describe specialized 

sublanguages, e.g. different dialects, or sublanguages characterized by 
techincal jargon or the like. meaning postulates are at heart just axioms, 
and it is easy to imagine modeling the difference between one dialect and 
another, or a general vs. a technical context, by differences in some choices 
of axioms. in the case of id65, i suppose that such 
versatility is built in, simply via the choice of data set to use as input. 

n       but since i know so little about id65, and since the range 
of kinds of meaning postulates imaginable is so open-ended, these remarks 
can only be suggestive and speculative.  

n       vladimir borschev and i have appealed to meaning postulates in some of 

work endeavoring to build bridges between the rich russian tradition of 
lexical semantics (esp. apresjan) and western formal semantics, showing 
how to recast apresjan   s    lexical portraits    in terms of meaning postulates.  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

33 

6. progress in theorizing about the lexicon and 
semantic competence 
n      

if time remains, i want to close by mentioning four areas where 
formal semanticists and philosophers have made valuable 
contributions to theoretically important problem areas in formal 
semantics. these are just thumbnail mentions, to possibly stimulate 
discussion, and far from exhaustive. 

n       on the problem of vagueness, one that is crucial to lexical 

semantics but hardly arises for id152: important 
work early on by kamp, pinkal, and others. supervaluation theory is 
one approach, various approaches to underspecificity. work on 
prototype theory is directly relevant here.  

n       context-dependence     formal semanticists have helped to uncover 
how widespread context-dependence of lexical meaning is     not just 
in indexical and demonstrative words, but in words like local, 
neighbor, right and left. several major approaches, with and without 
   invisible pronoun   -like elements and parameters of interpretation. 

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

34 

6. progress in theorizing, cont   d. 

n       prototype theory     formal semanticists have contributed to progress 

by helping to clarify when prototype-like meanings are part of 
semantics proper (red, chair) and when words may have relatively 
sharp meanings but prototype-like associated stereotypes 
(grandmother), and by suggesting tools for extending compositional 
semantic tools to deal with meanings that correspond to prototypes. 

n       the psychological reality puzzles     can meanings be in the head, 

etc.? as noted in section 2, major advances on that front have come 
from philosophers in recent decades, especially stalnaker and 
burge, in work that is more philosophy of mind than philosophy of 
language proper. the crucial insight is that psychological states 
should not be thought of in the excessively    internalist    way; 
psychological states should be conceived relationally,  

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

35 

selected references 

more material and fuller references can be found in several papers, 

versions of which are downloadable from my site, 
http://people.umass.edu/partee/ . fuller references for things i 
referred to in this talk are available on request. 

 
n       borschev, vladimir, and partee, barbara h. 1998. formal and lexical 

semantics and the genitive in negated existential sentences in russian. in 
fasl6: the connecticut meeting 1997. http://people.umass.edu/partee/
docs/russian.pdf. 

n       burge, tyler. 2010. origins of objectivity. oxford. 
n       partee, barbara h. 2011. formal semantics: origins, issues, early impact. 

in formal semantics and pragmatics. discourse, context, and models., 
eds. partee, glanzberg and skilters, 1-52. 
http://thebalticyearbook.org/journals/baltic/article/view/1580/1228 . 

n       stalnaker, robert. 1989. on what's in the head. philosophical perspectives 

3: philosophy of mind and action theory:287-316.   

august 22, 2016 

esslli refsemplus 

36 

