(g) magik yup   ik (1/1) [15 points] 

1 

central alaskan yup   ik belongs to the eskimo-aleut language family. it is spoken in western and southwestern 
alaska by around 20,000 speakers. two other yup   ik languages are still spoken: the alutiiq language and the 
siberian yup   ik language. 
 
yup   ik people have an interesting concept when it comes to counting     the words for the numbers can be 
broken down into meaningful parts which may be related to their body parts. for example, the word for five, 
talliman, means an arm and the word for six, arvinlegen, means cross over, as you need to change hand to go 
on counting. 
 
the yup   ik people often include geometry in their yup   ik parkas, often having border patterns. one such 
pattern comes in the form of a 3 by 3 square:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a magic square can be constructed by placing the digits 1 to 9 within the cells such that the sum of all the dig-
its in every row, column, and diagonal is the same.  
 
to help you fill in the magic square, the following clues are given in yup   ik. the numbers are spelled (i.e. 123 
is spelled as    one hundred and twenty-three    in english). hint: the yup'ik name for the number 294 is 
yuinaat qula cetaman qula cetaman. 

(b) 
(a) 
(c)  (d) (e) 
(f)  (g) (h) 

9 

2 

3 

2 

3 

across 

  down 

1  yuinaat yuinaq cetaman qula malruk  

  1  yuinaat yuinaq atauciq akimiaq pingayun  

2  yuinaat akimiaq malruk akimiaq malruk  

  2  yuinaat yuinaak malruk yuinaat malrunglegen qula atauciq  

3  yuinaat yuinaak malruk akimiaq atauciq  

  3  yuinaat qula pingayun akimiaq atauciq  

answer these questions in the answer sheets. 
 
 
g1. fill in the numbers missing from the magic square above. 
 
 
 
 
g2. in yup   ik, write the number given in 1-diagonal (top left cell to bottom right cell, shaded).  
 

  e.   

  d. 

  b. 

a. 

g. 

c. 

f. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

h. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

