(d) that   s an order! (1/2) 

cebuano is an austronesian language spoken in the philippines. the language was heavily influenced by 
spanish during a period of colonialism from 1521 to 1898.  
 
your task is to figure out what four women, althea, inday, janelle, and maria, had for lunch. each person had 
a main dish as well as a dessert and a drink. no two people ordered the same main dish, no two people or-
dered the same dessert, and no two people ordered the same drink.  
 
each of them chose from the following philippine menu : 

main dishes 
 
adobong baboy: pork dish cooked in soy sauce, vinegar, and garlic. 
adobong sitaw: string beans cooked in the adobo style (with soy sauce and vinegar).  
asado: beef dish cooked in a sauce with tomatoes, olives, onion, ketchup, red bell pepper, and potatoes. 
bulanglang: boiled mixed vegetables, including malunggay leaves, squash and onions in rice washing. 
 
desserts 
 
buko pie: a traditional filipino baked young coconut custard pie. 
kutsinta: a type of steamed rice cake made with rice flour, brown sugar and lye. 
maruya: banana fritters, served in syrup or ice cream. 
turon saba: deep fried plantains in spring roll wrappers. 
 
drinks 
 
bino: wine. 
gatas: milk. 
serbesa: beer. 
tubig: water. 

d1. based on the following clues try to determine who ordered which food and drink. write your answers 
in cebuano on the next page. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

janelle nikaon og bulanglang apan dili og turon saba. 
ang tao nga nipalit og asado ug nikaon og kutsinta wala niinom og serbesa. 
ang tao nga nikaon og adobong baboy ug niinom og tubig apan si dili althea. 
ang duha ka tao nga nanginon alkohol mga maria ug ang tao nga nipalit og adobong sitaw. 
inday nipalit og maruya. 
ang tolo ka tao nga wala nipalit og maruya mga maria, althea, ug janelle. 
ang tao nga nikaon og bulanglang si janelle. 
janelle nipalit og bulanglang apan dili og tubig. 

(d) that   s an order! (2/2) 

 

 

 

 

  althea 

inday 

janelle 

maria 

main dish 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

dessert 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

drink 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

