(c) aymara rules (1/1) 

languages have rules or constraints about how sounds should be put together to make words. not just any 
combination of sounds can be a word. linguists refer to these restrictions on word formation as the phono-
tactics of a language. there are many types of rules one can write to describe sound patterns. consider the 
following three rule types: 
 
counting mod 2: these constraints require that a certain sound occur either an even or odd number of times. 
we write counting mod 2 constraints as follows: either x=even, meaning the sound x must occur an even 
number of times, or x=odd, meaning the sound x must occur an odd number of times. for example, b=even 
requires that there be an even number of b's in every word. thus, b=even rules out words like    bas    or 
   bisbanib    while allowing words like    tas    or    bistanib   . the rule b=odd would do the exact opposite: allow 
   bas    and    bisbanib    but rule out    tas    and    bistanib   . 
 
strictly 2-local: these constraints prohibit two sounds from occurring right next to each other...meaning that 
x and y cannot occur right next to each other in any order. for example, *bn prohibits a b right before an n 
and an n right before a b. thus, *bn rules out    abnik    and    anbik    as possible words, while allowing words 
like    atnik    or    abanik   . 
 
strictly 2-piecewise: these constraints prohibit two sounds from occurring together in the same word    mean-
ing that x and y must not occur in the same word, no matter what may or may not come in between them. 
for example, *[bn] prohibits words with both b and n. like *bn, *[bn] allows words like    atnik    and rules out 
   abnik   , but unlike *bn, *[bn] also rules out    abanik    and    anabik   . 
 
out of these three types of rules, only two are known to be needed when describing the phonotactics of hu-
man languages. in this problem, you will write constraints in the forms just described in order to account for 
some of the phonotactics of bolivian aymara, an indigenous language spoken in bolivia. the following is a list 
of acceptable and unacceptable words in aymara: 
 

acceptable:   

tama 

weqo 

pisi 

janana 

unoqe  a 

purapa 

kawki 

sipita 

alwa 

qawa 

  unacceptable: 

kikpa 

oqara 

kunka 

tarkaka 

qemi 

putu 

jaqet 

  waketi 

kutaqa 

maqetaqi 

qolqeni 

mayni 

  uteka 

qaqira 

taqaki 

taqe 

jiliri 

qapa 

nayra 

tukjata 

tiwula 

  jakaqe 

temaka 

kape 

   

   

 

 

 

 

c1. write a set of constraints that will rule out all of the bad forms while permitting all of the good forms. 
use as few constraints as possible. follow the format described above for writing constraints. note: you 
don't need to account for every pattern you might find. you will lose points only for ruling out the acceptable 
forms, failing to rule out the unacceptable forms, or using more constraints than necessary. 
 
 
c2. which type of constraint isn't needed? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

