do not scan this page 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(b) a case of pali (1/2) [10 points] 

pali is a dead language, like latin. it was a literary language related to sanskrit, the ancestor of modern lan-
guages spoken in northern india, such as hindi. pali was first written down around 100 bce in sri lanka by 
buddhist monks to preserve the teachings of the buddha. pali used to be written in the br  m   script, but it is 
also written in the roman alphabet (which we   ll be using here). pali is still used by buddhist monks and schol-
ars (just as latin is still used in the vatican by catholic priests and theologians). 

pali is a highly inflected language, which means that the main words such as nouns and verbs get a range of 
endings (called    suffixes   ) or beginnings (called    prefixes   ) attached to make it clear what role the word is 
playing in the sentence.  

english also has some inflections, just not as many as pali. here are some examples of english inflections: 

     house     houses. the    s added to the end of a noun like    house    indicates that there is more than one you 

    

    

are talking about. 

john     john   s coat. the    s is used after a noun to indicate possession. 

i walk. you walked. he walks. she has been walking. the suffixes added to the verb    walk    give you sense of 
a different person doing the walking, or the walking taking place at a different time     the past as opposed 
to the present. 

pali has different consonant and vowel sounds, which explains the use of diacritics (special symbols) on partic-
ular letters. these do not matter for solving this puzzle. also, pali texts do not use capital letters or punctua-
tion. 

here are some sentences in pali with their english translations:  

pali 

english translation 

mah  matto nis  dati 

the minister sits down. 

mah  matta    upasa   kamanti 

they visit the minister. 

sama   o tath  gato hoti 

the philosopher is enlightened. 

sama   e attha    pucchanti 

they ask the philosophers the meaning. 

up  sako pucchati 

the disciple asks. 

loko mah  mattassa 

the minister   s world. 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 

(b)  a case of pali (2/2) 

b1. translate the following english sentences into pali: 

1.  the minister asks the philosophers. 

 

 

2.  the philosopher sits down. 

 

 

3.  they sit down. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b2. translate the following into english, using the vocabulary given here in its dictionary form (which is the            
 

same as the subject form, without any suffixes): 

 

 

 

1.  r  jo nis  dati 

 

 

2.  r  jo g  massa devo hoti 

 

 

pali 

r  jo 

devo 

g  mo 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

english translation 

king 

god 

village 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b3. translate the following into pali, entering one letter in each box, ignoring the diacritics: 

1.  the minister asks the kings.  

 

 

2.  the lay disciple   s village. 

 

 

3.  the meaning of the world is god. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

