your name:                                                                                         registration # 
 
 

(10 points) 

n. waanyi (1/3) 

waanyi is an australian language that used to be spoken south of the gulf of carpentaria in country that 
straddles the border between the state of queensland and the northern territory. few fluent speakers re-
main and our knowledge of this language relies mainly on audio recordings made between the 1960s and 
2008. the following is a transcribed and translated story told by a waanyi speaker.  

1  karrinja nyulu kirriya barrawunu. 
2 

jungku nyulu burrurri kundana. 

the woman is standing in the house. 
the man is sitting under a tree. 

3 

jungku bula nawunu rajini. 

they are here in the camp. 

4  dabarraba nyulu waliji, nangkani burrurrii. 

this man is cooking meat. 

5 

balikajba nyulu, walijiyanyi, nana kirriya. 

she is hungry for meat, that woman. 

6  nayi burrurri, lalujbu nyulu. 

this man, he gets up. 

7  kanungku barri nyulu jilaba kirriyawurru. 

he then goes up to the woman. 

8  wijbi barri nyulu kirriya walijiyanyi jangkaranyi-

yanyi, karrinjawurru. 

9  nanangkani kirriyaa, nanganja barri nyulu manii 

10 

11 

nana waliji burrurrinanja. 
jarrba barri nyulu, balikajini, nanangkani kirriyaa, 
nana waliji, karrinjana nanawunu barrawunu. 
jawikajba barri nyulu burrurri: ninji, wanyi ninji 
jarrba? 

then he gives some cooked meat to the woman 
who   s standing. 
that woman, she then takes that meat with her 
hand from the man. 
then that woman hungrily eats that meat, standing 
there in the house. 
she then asks the man. what are you eating? 

12  budangku ngawu jarrba jalanya. 

i   m not eating now. 

13 

jilakanyi ngawu kakuwanyi nanganjaanyi. karubu-
yanyba ngawu. 

i   ll go and catch some fish. i   m going fishing. 

14  wunjuku ninji jilaba? 

where are you going? 

15  kularra ngawu jilaba, nanangkurru 

i   m going south, to that river. 

manangkawurru. 

16  ngabungabu, malijibi nyulu kirriyaa, banjana nyulu 

jilaba. 

17  najba barri nyulu, burrurri, jungkuwurru, karubu

-yanykurru. 

late afternoon, the woman followed him, she 
went after. 
then she saw the man sitting fishing. 

18  manangkana nyulu jungku, nana burrurri. 

that man was sitting by the river. 

19  najba nyulu kirriya, kanungkuwurru. 
20  kawa! jilanji nangkurru. 

he saw the woman approaching. 
come! come here! 

 

(continued on next page) 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 
 

n. waanyi (2/3) 

jawikajba nyulu burrurri kanungkunu. 

21 
22  kaku ninji nanganja? 

she asked the man as she approached. 
have you caught any fish? 

23  budangku ngawu kakuwanyi. 

24  budangku nayi kakuwanyi. 

i   ve got no fish. 

there   s no fish here. 

25  ngamuyu-kiya ninji nanganja kaku nawunu. kaja. 

i thought you would have caught fish here. lots. 

26  yanyba nyulu nangangi. 

he said to her: 

27  najba ngawu kaku nawunu wanamini,  

i saw fish swimming here in the water yesterday. 

bilikijawurru, bungkuna. 

28  budangku yalu balikajba walijiyanyi jalanya. 

they are not hungry for meat right now. 

29  ngadijbi yaluwangka bulinjana. 

they are hiding in the water-grass. 

30  rajiwurru barri bula kannga, budangku kakuwanyi.  they both returned home, without any fish. 

31  balikajini bula kannga rajiwurru, kirriya, burrurri. 

they both return home hungry     the woman 
(and) the man. 

n-1 translate these waanyi sentences into english: 
 
1. jungku ngawu rajini. 
 
 
 
 
 
2. jawikajba barri bula nayi burrurri. 
 
 
 
 
 
3. budangku ngawu balikajba jalanya. 
 
 
 
 

 

your name:                                                                                         registration # 
 

n. waanyi (3/3) 

 
n-2 translate these english sentences into waanyi: 
 
 
4. the man and the woman are sitting here. 
 
 
 
 
5. that woman eats fish. 
 
 
 
 
6.  this man cooks that meat standing under a tree. 
 
 
 
 
n-3 explain your answers to n-1 and n2 here. 
 

 

