your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(10 points) 

(a) running on mt (1/2) 

machine translation (mt) systems can be used to translate texts into english (for example, from the web) 
that you could otherwise not read at all.  mt usually does a pretty good job, except that sometimes the text 
contains unexpected words.  this may come down to the problem of    word sense selection   : the source-
language text may contain words which have multiple meanings, and the mt system has chosen the wrong 
one. 
 
in the text below, the effect of this has been simulated: we have taken an ordinary english text and replaced a 
number of individual words with alternative words which share a meaning with the original word, but which 
are not correct in this context.  for example, in the first line, we have    angry-legged    instead of    cross-
legged   . 
 

annie jones sat angry-legged on her uncle john's facade porch;  

 
                                   cross 
her favorite rag doll clutched under one supply. the deceased afternoon  
 
sun polished through the departs of the giant oak tree, casting its  
 
flickering ignite on the cabin. this entranced the child and she sat with  
 
her confront changed upward, as if hypnotized. a stabilize hum of  
 
conversation flowed from inside of the cabin.  
 
 
 
why don't you spend the night here? it's buying awfully deceased and it  
 
will be dark ahead you construct it house."  
 
 
 
steve is about his supper. i departed plenty for him and the boys on the  
 
support of the stove, but he'll want annie and me house.     

"ellen, i'm really happy that you arrived to church with us today.  

"i'll be thin sally," replied annie's mother. "anyhow, you know how  

 
 
a1.  your job is to find each incorrect word in the text above, and then in the table on the next page 
 
 
 
 
 
 

write the incorrect word and its correct replacement.  none of the words are just synonyms (e.g., in 
line 2,    clutched    could be replaced by    held   , but it   s not necessary:    clutched    makes good sense 
here).  and in every case, you have to replace one word by another (single) word.  but beware: the 
mistaken word does not always match the intended word   s part-of-speech (e.g., a noun may be replaced by 
an adjective, an adjective by an adverb, etc.).  there are 20 examples to find (including the one we 
have already given you), but like a real mt system, some of the mistakes are repeated. 

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(a) running on mt (2/2) 

incorrect word 

correct replacement 

angry 

cross 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

