your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

 

(15 points) 

(c) the war of the dots (1/2) 

before the braille tactile writing system was well-established in the u.s., the new york point system was widely 
used in american blind education.  new york point was developed in the 1860s by william bell walt for the 
new york institute for the blind, and was intended to fix the shortcomings he perceived in the french and 
english braille standards. 
 
the next six decades in blind education became known as the war of the dots, as bitter feuds developed be-
tween proponents of this homegrown system and more international braille-based systems.  new york point 
finally met its end after a series of public hearings convinced educational authorities that there should be a 
single standard for the entire english-speaking world. 
 
experts from both sides weighed in on the systems    merits.  the proponents of new york point argued that 
allowing letters to vary in size (from a 2x1 grid to a 2x4 grid, rather than a fixed 3x2 grid) allowed the most 
frequent letters to use fewer columns, resulting in space (and cost!) savings when publishing texts for the 
blind.  for example, consider the number of dots needed to write the following names in each system: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they also pointed out that new york point had a distinct series of capital letters, whereas braille only had a 
   capital    punctuation mark. 
 
on the braille side, experts such as helen keller wrote that the new york point capitalization system was 
unintuitive and confusing (   i have often mistaken d for j, i for b and y for double o in signatures, and i waste 
time looking at initial letters over and over again   ), and that using braille allowed her to correspond with 
blind people from all over the world.  

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

 

(c) the war of the dots (2/2) 

c1.  the following words in new york point represent (in no particular order) the names ashley, barb, 
 
carl, dave, elena, fred, gerald, heather, ivan, jack, kathy, and lisa.  which is which?  write the first 
 
letters of the appropriate names in the boxes provided. 
 

a.  k  a1y  

b.  e  l e na  

c.  i  va n  

d.  c  ar l  

e.  j  ack  

f.  g  er a l d  

g.  l  is a  

h.  f  r e d  

i.  h  ea 1 e r  

j.  b  arb  

k.  a  $l ey  

l.  d  av e  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c2.  how would you write the following names in new york point?  (you are provided with a 2x4 grid in 
 
 

which to write each new york point letter.  you may place a maximum of one dot per cell.) 

 

 

 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f. 

billy 

ethan 

iggie 

orson 

sasha 

tim 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

