your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(i) a large spoon is enough (1/3) 

(10 points) 

viazi vibaya vinatosha. 

mtu ana watoto wazuri. 

kijiko kikubwa kinatosha. 

a large spoon is enough. 

mwavuli una mfuko mdogo. 

wafalme wana vijiko vidogo. 

watu wana mifuko mikubwa. 

the man has good children. 

the kings have small spoons. 

mto mrefu una visiwa vikubwa. 

the umbrella has a small bag. 

the large island has a bad king. 

the long river has large islands. 

kisiwa kikubwa kina mfalme mbaya. 

watoto wabaya wana miwavuli midogo. 

the bad children have small umbrellas. 

swahili is a bantu language spoken by various ethnic groups that inhabit large areas of eastern africa. 
although only 5-10 million people speak it as their native language, swahili is a lingua franca for much of the 
region, it is a national or official language of four nations, and it is the only language of african origin among 
the official working languages of the african union. 
 
study the following sentences with their english translations, given in order, and then translate the sentences 
given below.  swahili does not have any words for    the    or    a   . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

translate the following phrases into swahili: 

a.  the small children have good spoons. 

a small child has a good potato. 

the child has a large umbrella. 

the bad potatoes are enough. 

b.  a long umbrella is enough. 

good long rivers are enough 

mtoto mdogo ana kiazi kizuri. 

mtoto ana mwavuli mkubwa. 

mito mizuri mirefu inatosha. 

the men have large bags. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(i) a large spoon is enough (2/3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
i2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

c.  a bad potato has a good bag. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d.  good kings are enough. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

e.  the long island has bad rivers. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

f.  the spoons have long bags. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

if the swahili word for    the prince    is mkuu, what do you think the word for    the princes    is, and why? 

a.  write the swahili word for    the princes    in the box below. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b.  explain your answer to (a).  (write your explanation on the following page.) 

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(i) a large spoon is enough (3/3) 

 

