your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                         

 

(20 points) 

(g) tangkhul tangle (1/2) 

tangkhul is a language spoken in the northernmost district of the indian state of manipur. like manipuri (or 
meithei) and many other languages of northeast india, tangkhul is related to tibetan and burmese rather 
than to hindi, bengali, marathi, gujurati, or other well-known languages of india. 
 
tangkhul words can be very long and quite complicated in their structure. sometimes single words may have 
to be translated with whole sentences in english. also, pronouns (words like he, she, it, and they) can be left 
out if their meanings can still be filled in from context. following are a list of sentences from tangkhul and 
their english translations (in alphabetical order). in the english translations, pronouns are enclosed in paren-
thesis when they are left out of the tangkhul sentences. tangkhul, unlike modern english (but like old eng-
lish), distinguishes three different grammatical numbers: singular (referring to one person or thing), dual 
(referring to two persons or things), and plural (referring to three or more persons or things). the abbrevia-
tions sg., dl., and pl. indicate    singular,       dual    and    plural,    respectively. 

 translation by the corresponding tangkhul sentence (8 points) 

g1.   match the tangkhul sentences with their english translations by writing the number of the english 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

english translations  
1) do they (pl.) want to pinch one another?  
2) do you (sg.) see it? 
3) have you (pl.) all come? 
4) he/she will pinch all (of them). 
5) (they) all have come. 
6) they (dl.) pinched one another. 
7) they (dl.) will come. 
8) we (pl.) will have wanted to see (it). 
9) we (dl.) saw one another. 

 
tangkhul sentences  
a) a masikserra    
 
 
b)   ni masikngarokei    
 
c)   thum masikngarokng  il     
d) ini th  ingarokei  
 
 
e) na th  il    
 
 
f) ithum th  ing  ih  irara  
 
g) r  serh  ira  
 
 
h)   ni r  ra   
 
 
i) nathum r  serh  iral     
 

 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

a 

b 

c 

d 

e 

f 

g 

h 

i 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                         

 

(20 points) 

(g) tangkhul tangle (2/2) 

 

           

g2.  translate the following sentences into english. always start with the leftmost box. 
 
 
 
 

  please follow the style of the english translations given in g1 as closely as possible. (6 points) 
   
 

a) nathum masikserng  ira 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

          b)   thum th  iei 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

   
   

 

 
c) i th  iserh  iral    

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
g3.   translate the following sentences into tangkhul (6 points). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
    1) do you (dl.) want to come?  
 
 
     
 
 
 
     
 
 
      2) you (sg.) have seen (it) all. 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
    3) we (pl.) will want to see one another. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

