your name:                                       

 

 

 
(5 points) 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(b) nok-nok! (1/2) 

christopher robin is the most educated friend of winnie-the-pooh, and he can spell a 
lot of simple words, and even some long and delicate words, but unfortunately he of-
ten spells them incorrectly. for example, he has helped owl to write the following two 
notices on the door of owl   s residence at the chestnuts: 

  

ples ring if an rnser is reqird.   plez cnoke if an rnsr is not reqid.  

although owl is very proud of these notices, he is also concerned that some of his 
friends may not understand them; in fact, even owl himself finds the notices a bit 
confusing. 
to help christopher robin with his spelling, winnie-the-pooh and owl have bought 
him an electronic spelling tutor, which pronounces various words and asks the user to 
spell them. if the user makes a mistake, the tutor shows the correct spelling, along 
with a comment on the accuracy of the user   s spelling; it uses four comments: almost 
right, quite close, a bit confusing, and very confusing. for instance, christopher robin has 
received the following feedback during his initial experiments with the tutor: 

spelling by 

christopher robin 
flocinaucinihilipilification 
owll 
pseudopseudohipoparathyroidism 
ples 
reqird 
rnser 
antidisestablishmentaraniasm 
wol 
humuhumunukunukuapuaua   a 
plez 
cnoke 
rnsr 
reqid 
pneumonoultramicroscopic- 
    cilikovolkanokoniosis 
mispeln 
mestipenk 

correct 
spelling 

floccinaucinihilipilification 
owl 
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism 
please 
required 
answer 
antidisestablishmentarianism 
owl 
humuhumunukunukuapua   a 
please 
knock 
answer 
required 
pneumonoultramicroscopic- 
    silicovolcanokoniosis 
misspelling 
mistyping 

comment 

almost right 
almost right 
almost right 
quite close 
quite close 
quite close 
quite close 
quite close 
quite close 
a bit confusing 
a bit confusing 
a bit confusing 
a bit confusing 
a bit confusing 
 
very confusing 
very confusing 

your name:                                       

 

 

 

 

registration #:                                        

(b) nok-nok! (2/2) 

your task is to determine how the tutor chooses its comments and give the appropri-
ate comment for each of the following six misspellings of the word    typo   . you do not 
need to explain your answers; just indicate the right comments. 

for each misspelling, put the    x    sign in the column with the appropriate comment. 
please note that each row in the table must have exactly one    x sign. if you mark multi-
ple  comments  for  the  same  misspelling,  it  will  be  graded  as  a  wrong  answer.  also 
note that there is no penalty for a wrong answer; thus, if you are unsure of the right 

misspelling of    typo    

comment by the tutor 

almost right  quite close  a bit  confusing  very confusing 

oooo 

opyt 

pyto 

typ 

typa 

typotypo 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

as a side note, the dictionary definitions of the long and delicate words misspelled by 
christopher robin are as follows; these definitions are unrelated to the problem. 
 
floccinaucinihilipilification: act or habit of estimating or describing something as worth-
less, or making something to be worthless by deprecation. 
 
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism: inherited disorder that closely simulates the symp-
toms, but not the consequences, of pseudohypoparathyroidism; thus, it has mild or no 
manifestations of hypoparathyroidism or tetanic convulsions. 
 
antidisestablishmentarianism: nineteenth century movement in england opposed to the 
separation of church and state. 
 
humuhumunukunukuapua   a: one of several species of triggerfish. 
 
pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanokoniosis: lung disease caused by the inhalation of 
very fine silica dust, mostly found in volcanoes 

