speech and language processing. daniel jurafsky & james h. martin.
rights reserved.

draft of september 23, 2018.

copyright c(cid:13) 2018.

all

chapter

11 syntactic parsing

one morning i shot an elephant in my pajamas.
how he got into my pajamas i don   t know.

groucho marx, animal crackers, 1930

syntactic parsing is the task of recognizing a sentence and assigning a syntactic
structure to it. this chapter focuses on the structures assigned by context-free gram-
mars of the kind described in chapter 10. since they are based on a purely declar-
ative formalism, context-free grammars don   t specify how the parse tree for a given
sentence should be computed. we therefore need to specify algorithms that employ
these grammars to ef   ciently produce correct trees.

parse trees are directly useful in applications such as grammar checking in
word-processing systems: a sentence that cannot be parsed may have grammatical
errors (or at least be hard to read). more typically, however, parse trees serve as an
important intermediate stage of representation for semantic analysis (as we show in
chapter 15) and thus play an important role in applications like id53
and information extraction. for example, to answer the question

what books were written by british women authors before 1800?

we   ll need to know that the subject of the sentence was what books and that the by-
adjunct was british women authors to help us    gure out that the user wants a list of
books (and not a list of authors).

before presenting any algorithms, we begin by discussing how the ambiguity
arises again in this context and the problems it presents. the section that fol-
lows then presents the cocke-kasami-younger (cky) algorithm (kasami 1965,
younger 1967), the standard id145 approach to syntactic parsing.
recall that we   ve already seen applications of id145 algorithms in
the minimum-edit-distance and viterbi algorithms of earlier chapters. finally, we
discuss partial parsing methods, for use in situations in which a super   cial syntac-
tic analysis of an input may be suf   cient.

11.1 ambiguity

structural
ambiguity

ambiguity is perhaps the most serious problem faced by syntactic parsers. chap-
ter 8 introduced the notions of part-of-speech ambiguity and part-of-speech dis-
ambiguation. here, we introduce a new kind of ambiguity, called structural ambi-
guity, which arises from many commonly used rules in phrase-structure grammars.
to illustrate the issues associated with structural ambiguity, we   ll make use of a new
toy grammar l1, shown in figure 11.1, which consists of the l0 grammar from the
last chapter augmented with a few additional rules.

structural ambiguity occurs when the grammar can assign more than one parse
to a sentence. groucho marx   s well-known line as captain spaulding in animal

2 chapter 11

    syntactic parsing

lexicon
det     that | this | the | a
noun     book |    ight | meal | money
verb     book | include | prefer
pronoun     i | she | me
proper-noun     houston | nwa
aux     does
preposition     from | to | on | near | through

grammar

s     np vp
s     aux np vp
s     vp
np     pronoun
np     proper-noun
np     det nominal
nominal     noun
nominal     nominal noun
nominal     nominal pp
vp     verb
vp     verb np
vp     verb np pp
vp     verb pp
vp     vp pp
pp     preposition np
figure 11.1 the l1 miniature english grammar and lexicon.

s

s

np

vp

np

vp

pronoun

verb

np

pronoun

vp

pp

i

shot

det

nominal

i

verb

np

in my pajamas

an

nominal

pp

shot

det

nominal

noun

in my pajamas

an

noun

elephant

elephant

figure 11.2 two parse trees for an ambiguous sentence. the parse on the left corresponds to the humorous
reading in which the elephant is in the pajamas, the parse on the right corresponds to the reading in which
captain spaulding did the shooting in his pajamas.

attachment
ambiguity

crackers is ambiguous because the phrase in my pajamas can be part of the np
headed by elephant or a part of the verb phrase headed by shot. figure 11.2 illus-
trates these two analyses of marx   s line using rules from l1.

structural ambiguity, appropriately enough, comes in many forms. two common

kinds of ambiguity are attachment ambiguity and coordination ambiguity.

a sentence has an attachment ambiguity if a particular constituent can be at-
tached to the parse tree at more than one place. the groucho marx sentence is
an example of pp-attachment ambiguity. various kinds of adverbial phrases are
also subject to this kind of ambiguity. for instance, in the following example the
gerundive-vp    ying to paris can be part of a gerundive sentence whose subject is
the eiffel tower or it can be an adjunct modifying the vp headed by saw:

coordination
ambiguity

syntactic
disambiguation

11.2

    cky parsing: a id145 approach

3

(11.1) we saw the eiffel tower    ying to paris.

in coordination ambiguity different sets of phrases can be conjoined by a con-
junction like and. for example, the phrase old men and women can be bracketed as
[old [men and women]], referring to old men and old women, or as [old men] and
[women], in which case it is only the men who are old.

these ambiguities combine in complex ways in real sentences. a program that
summarized the news, for example, would need to be able to parse sentences like
the following from the brown corpus:
(11.2) president kennedy today pushed aside other white house business to

devote all his time and attention to working on the berlin crisis address he
will deliver tomorrow night to the american people over nationwide
television and radio.

this sentence has a number of ambiguities, although since they are semantically
unreasonable, it requires a careful reading to see them. the last noun phrase could be
parsed [nationwide [television and radio]] or [[nationwide television] and radio].
the direct object of pushed aside should be other white house business but could
also be the bizarre phrase [other white house business to devote all his time and
attention to working] (i.e., a structure like kennedy af   rmed [his intention to propose
a new budget to address the de   cit]). then the phrase on the berlin crisis address he
will deliver tomorrow night to the american people could be an adjunct modifying
the verb pushed. a pp like over nationwide television and radio could be attached
to any of the higher vps or nps (e.g., it could modify people or night).

the fact that there are many grammatically correct but semantically unreason-
able parses for naturally occurring sentences is an irksome problem that affects all
parsers. ultimately, most natural language processing systems need to be able to
choose a single correct parse from the multitude of possible parses through a process
of syntactic disambiguation. effective disambiguation algorithms require statisti-
cal, semantic, and contextual knowledge sources that vary in how well they can be
integrated into parsing algorithms.

fortunately, the cky algorithm presented in the next section is designed to ef   -
ciently handle structural ambiguities of the kind we   ve been discussing. and as we   ll
see in chapter 12, there are straightforward ways to integrate statistical techniques
into the basic cky framework to produce highly accurate parsers.

11.2 cky parsing: a id145 approach

the previous section introduced some of the problems associated with ambiguous
grammars. fortunately, id145 provides a powerful framework for
addressing these problems, just as it did with the minimum id153, viterbi,
and forward algorithms. recall that id145 approaches systemati-
cally    ll in tables of solutions to sub-problems. when complete, the tables contain
the solution to all the sub-problems needed to solve the problem as a whole.
in
the case of syntactic parsing, these sub-problems represent parse trees for all the
constituents detected in the input.

the id145 advantage arises from the context-free nature of our
grammar rules     once a constituent has been discovered in a segment of the input
we can record its presence and make it available for use in any subsequent derivation
that might require it. this provides both time and storage ef   ciencies since subtrees

4 chapter 11

    syntactic parsing

can be looked up in a table, not reanalyzed. this section presents the cocke-kasami-
younger (cky) algorithm, the most widely used dynamic-programming based ap-
proach to parsing. related approaches include the earley algorithm (earley, 1970)
and chart parsing (kaplan 1973, kay 1982).

unit
productions

11.2.1 conversion to chomsky normal form
we begin our investigation of the cky algorithm by examining the requirement
that grammars used with it must be in chomsky normal form (cnf). recall from
chapter 10 that grammars in cnf are restricted to rules of the form a     b c or
a     w. that is, the right-hand side of each rule must expand either to two non-
terminals or to a single terminal. restricting a grammar to cnf does not lead to
any loss in expressiveness, since any context-free grammar can be converted into
a corresponding cnf grammar that accepts exactly the same set of strings as the
original grammar.

let   s start with the process of converting a generic id18 into one represented in
cnf. assuming we   re dealing with an   -free grammar, there are three situations we
need to address in any generic grammar: rules that mix terminals with non-terminals
on the right-hand side, rules that have a single non-terminal on the right-hand side,
and rules in which the length of the right-hand side is greater than 2.

the remedy for rules that mix terminals and non-terminals is to simply introduce
a new dummy non-terminal that covers only the original terminal. for example, a
rule for an in   nitive verb phrase such as inf-vp     to vp would be replaced by the
two rules inf-vp     to vp and to     to.

rules with a single non-terminal on the right are called unit productions. we
can eliminate unit productions by rewriting the right-hand side of the original rules
with the right-hand side of all the non-unit production rules that they ultimately lead
       b by a chain of one or more unit productions and b       
to. more formally, if a
is a non-unit production in our grammar, then we add a        for each such rule in
the grammar and discard all the intervening unit productions. as we demonstrate
with our toy grammar, this can lead to a substantial    attening of the grammar and a
consequent promotion of terminals to fairly high levels in the resulting trees.

rules with right-hand sides longer than 2 are normalized through the introduc-
tion of new non-terminals that spread the longer sequences over several new rules.
formally, if we have a rule like

a     b c   

we replace the leftmost pair of non-terminals with a new non-terminal and introduce
a new production result in the following new rules:

a     x1   
x1     b c

in the case of longer right-hand sides, we simply iterate this process until the of-
fending rule has been replaced by rules of length 2. the choice of replacing the
leftmost pair of non-terminals is purely arbitrary; any systematic scheme that results
in binary rules would suf   ce.
in our current grammar, the rule s     aux np vp would be replaced by the two
rules s     x1 vp and x1     aux np.

the entire conversion process can be summarized as follows:
1. copy all conforming rules to the new grammar unchanged.

11.2

    cky parsing: a id145 approach

5

l1 in cnf

l1 grammar

s     np vp
s     aux np vp
s     vp

s     np vp
s     x1 vp
x1     aux np
s     book | include | prefer
s     verb np
s     x2 pp
s     verb pp
s     vp pp
np     i | she | me
np     twa | houston
np     det nominal
nominal     book |    ight | meal | money
nominal     nominal noun
nominal     nominal pp
vp     book | include | prefer
vp     verb np
vp     x2 pp
x2     verb np
vp     verb pp
vp     vp pp
pp     preposition np

np     pronoun
np     proper-noun
np     det nominal
nominal     noun
nominal     nominal noun
nominal     nominal pp
vp     verb
vp     verb np
vp     verb np pp
vp     verb pp
vp     vp pp
pp     preposition np
figure 11.3 l1 grammar and its conversion to cnf. note that although they aren   t shown
here, all the original lexical entries from l1 carry over unchanged as well.

2. convert terminals within rules to dummy non-terminals.
3. convert unit-productions.
4. make all rules binary and add them to new grammar.
figure 11.3 shows the results of applying this entire conversion procedure to
the l1 grammar introduced earlier on page 2. note that this    gure doesn   t show
the original lexical rules; since these original lexical rules are already in cnf, they
all carry over unchanged to the new grammar. figure 11.3 does, however, show
the various places where the process of eliminating unit productions has, in effect,
created new lexical rules. for example, all the original verbs have been promoted to
both vps and to ss in the converted grammar.

11.2.2 cky recognition
with our grammar now in cnf, each non-terminal node above the part-of-speech
level in a parse tree will have exactly two daughters. a two-dimensional matrix can
be used to encode the structure of an entire tree. for a sentence of length n, we will
work with the upper-triangular portion of an (n + 1)   (n + 1) matrix. each cell [i, j]
in this matrix contains the set of non-terminals that represent all the constituents that
span positions i through j of the input. since our indexing scheme begins with 0,
it   s natural to think of the indexes as pointing at the gaps between the input words
(as in 0 book 1 that 2    ight 3). it follows then that the cell that represents the entire
input resides in position [0,n] in the matrix.

since each non-terminal entry in our table has two daughters in the parse, it fol-
lows that for each constituent represented by an entry [i, j], there must be a position
in the input, k, where it can be split into two parts such that i < k < j. given such

6 chapter 11

    syntactic parsing

a position k, the    rst constituent [i,k] must lie to the left of entry [i, j] somewhere
along row i, and the second entry [k, j] must lie beneath it, along column j.

to make this more concrete, consider the following example with its completed

parse matrix, shown in fig. 11.4.

(11.3) book the    ight through houston.

the superdiagonal row in the matrix contains the parts of speech for each input word
in the input. the subsequent diagonals above that superdiagonal contain constituents
that cover all the spans of increasing length in the input.

figure 11.4 completed parse table for book the    ight through houston.

given this setup, cky recognition consists of    lling the parse table in the right
way. to do this, we   ll proceed in a bottom-up fashion so that at the point where
we are    lling any cell [i, j], the cells containing the parts that could contribute to
this entry (i.e., the cells to the left and the cells below) have already been    lled.
the algorithm given in fig. 11.5    lls the upper-triangular matrix a column at a time
working from left to right, with each column    lled from bottom to top, as the right
side of fig. 11.4 illustrates. this scheme guarantees that at each point in time we
have all the information we need (to the left, since all the columns to the left have
already been    lled, and below since we   re    lling bottom to top). it also mirrors on-
line parsing since    lling the columns from left to right corresponds to processing
each word one at a time.

function cky-parse(words, grammar) returns table
for j   from 1 to length(words) do

for all {a | a     words[ j]     grammar}
table[ j    1, j]   table[ j    1, j]     a
for i   from j    2 downto 0 do

for k   i + 1 to j    1 do

for all {a | a     bc     grammar and b     table[i,k] and c     table[k, j]}

table[i,j]   table[i,j]     a

figure 11.5 the cky algorithm.

bookthe flight throughhoustons, vp, verb, nominal, nouns,vp,x2s,vp,x2detnpnpnominal,nounnominalprepppnp,proper-noun[0,1][0,2][0,3][0,4][0,5][1,2][1,3][2,3][1,4][2,5][2,4][3,4][4,5][3,5][1,5]11.2

    cky parsing: a id145 approach

7

figure 11.6 all the ways to    ll the [i, j]th cell in the cky table.

the outermost loop of the algorithm given in fig. 11.5 iterates over the columns,
and the second loop iterates over the rows, from the bottom up. the purpose of the
innermost loop is to range over all the places where a substring spanning i to j in
the input might be split in two. as k ranges over the places where the string can be
split, the pairs of cells we consider move, in lockstep, to the right along row i and
down along column j. figure 11.6 illustrates the general case of    lling cell [i, j]. at
each such split, the algorithm considers whether the contents of the two cells can be
combined in a way that is sanctioned by a rule in the grammar. if such a rule exists,
the non-terminal on its left-hand side is entered into the table.

figure 11.7 shows how the    ve cells of column 5 of the table are    lled after the
word houston is read. the arrows point out the two spans that are being used to add
an entry to the table. note that the action in cell [0,5] indicates the presence of three
alternative parses for this input, one where the pp modi   es the    ight, one where
it modi   es the booking, and one that captures the second argument in the original
vp     verb np pp rule, now captured indirectly with the vp     x2 pp rule.

......[0,n][i,i+1][i,i+2][i,j-2][i,j-1][i+1,j][i+2,j][j-1,j][j-2,j][i,j]...[0,1][n-1, n]8 chapter 11

    syntactic parsing

figure 11.7 filling the cells of column 5 after reading the word houston.

bookthe flight throughhoustons, vp, verb, nominal, nouns,vp,x2detnpnominal,nounnominalprepnp,proper-noun[0,1][0,2][0,3][0,4][0,5][1,2][1,3][2,3][1,4][2,5][2,4][3,4][4,5][3,5][1,5]bookthe flight throughhoustons, vp, verb, nominal, nouns,vp,x2detnpnpnominal,nounprepppnp,proper-noun[0,1][0,2][0,3][0,4][0,5][1,2][1,3][2,3][1,4][2,5][2,4][3,4][4,5][3,5][1,5]bookthe flight throughhoustons, vp, verb, nominal, nouns,vp,x2detnpnpnominal,nounnominalprepppnp,proper-noun[0,1][0,2][0,3][0,4][0,5][1,2][1,3][2,3][1,4][2,5][2,4][3,4][4,5][3,5][1,5]bookthe flight throughhoustons, vp, verb, nominal, nouns,vp,x2detnpnpnominal,nounnominalprepppnp,proper-noun[0,1][0,2][0,3][0,4][0,5][1,2][1,3][2,3][1,4][2,5][2,4][3,4][4,5][3,5][1,5]bookthe flight throughhoustons, vp, verb, nominal, nouns,vp,x2detnpnpnominal,nounnominalprepppnp,proper-noun[0,1][0,2][0,3][0,4][1,2][1,3][2,3][1,4][2,5][2,4][3,4][4,5][3,5][1,5]s2, vps3s1,vp, x211.3

    partial parsing

9

11.2.3 cky parsing
the algorithm given in fig. 11.5 is a recognizer, not a parser; for it to succeed, it
simply has to    nd an s in cell [0,n]. to turn it into a parser capable of returning all
possible parses for a given input, we can make two simple changes to the algorithm:
the    rst change is to augment the entries in the table so that each non-terminal is
paired with pointers to the table entries from which it was derived (more or less as
shown in fig. 11.7), the second change is to permit multiple versions of the same
non-terminal to be entered into the table (again as shown in fig. 11.7). with these
changes, the completed table contains all the possible parses for a given input. re-
turning an arbitrary single parse consists of choosing an s from cell [0,n] and then
recursively retrieving its component constituents from the table.

of course, returning all the parses for a given input may incur considerable cost
since an exponential number of parses may be associated with a given input. in such
cases, returning all the parses will have an unavoidable exponential cost. looking
forward to chapter 12, we can also think about retrieving the best parse for a given
input by further augmenting the table to contain the probabilities of each entry. re-
trieving the most probable parse consists of running a suitably modi   ed version of
the viterbi algorithm from chapter 8 over the completed parse table.

11.2.4 cky in practice
finally, we should note that while the restriction to cnf does not pose a prob-
lem theoretically, it does pose some non-trivial problems in practice. obviously, as
things stand now, our parser isn   t returning trees that are consistent with the grammar
given to us by our friendly syntacticians. in addition to making our grammar devel-
opers unhappy, the conversion to cnf will complicate any syntax-driven approach
to semantic analysis.

one approach to getting around these problems is to keep enough information
around to transform our trees back to the original grammar as a post-processing step
of the parse. this is trivial in the case of the transformation used for rules with length
greater than 2. simply deleting the new dummy non-terminals and promoting their
daughters restores the original tree.

in the case of unit productions, it turns out to be more convenient to alter the ba-
sic cky algorithm to handle them directly than it is to store the information needed
to recover the correct trees. exercise 11.3 asks you to make this change. many of
the probabilistic parsers presented in chapter 12 use the cky algorithm altered in
just this manner. another solution is to adopt a more complex dynamic program-
ming solution that simply accepts arbitrary id18s. the next section presents such an
approach.

11.3 partial parsing

partial parse
shallow parse

many language processing tasks do not require complex, complete parse trees for all
inputs. for these tasks, a partial parse, or shallow parse, of input sentences may
be suf   cient. for example, information extraction systems generally do not extract
all the possible information from a text: they simply identify and classify the seg-
ments in a text that are likely to contain valuable information. similarly, information
retrieval systems may index texts according to a subset of the constituents found in

10 chapter 11

    syntactic parsing

them.

there are many different approaches to partial parsing. some make use of
cascades of    nite state transducers to produce tree-like representations. these ap-
proaches typically produce    atter trees than the ones we   ve been discussing in this
chapter and the previous one. this    atness arises from the fact that    nite state trans-
ducer approaches generally defer decisions that may require semantic or contex-
tual factors, such as prepositional phrase attachments, coordination ambiguities, and
nominal compound analyses. nevertheless, the intent is to produce parse trees that
link all the major constituents in an input.

an alternative style of partial parsing is known as chunking. chunking is the
process of identifying and classifying the    at, non-overlapping segments of a sen-
tence that constitute the basic non-recursive phrases corresponding to the major
content-word parts-of-speech: noun phrases, verb phrases, adjective phrases, and
prepositional phrases. the task of    nding all the base noun phrases in a text is
particularly common. since chunked texts lack a hierarchical structure, a simple
bracketing notation is suf   cient to denote the location and the type of the chunks in
a given example:
(11.4)
this bracketing notation makes clear the two fundamental tasks that are involved
in chunking: segmenting (   nding the non-overlapping extents of the chunks) and
labeling (assigning the correct tag to the discovered chunks).

[np the morning    ight] [pp from] [np denver] [vp has arrived.]

some input words may not be part of any chunk, particularly in tasks like base

np:
(11.5)

[np the morning    ight] from [np denver] has arrived.

what constitutes a syntactic base phrase depends on the application (and whether
the phrases come from a treebank). nevertheless, some standard guidelines are fol-
lowed in most systems. first and foremost, base phrases of a given type do not
recursively contain any constituents of the same type. eliminating this kind of recur-
sion leaves us with the problem of determining the boundaries of the non-recursive
phrases. in most approaches, base phrases include the headword of the phrase, along
with any pre-head material within the constituent, while crucially excluding any
post-head material. eliminating post-head modi   ers obviates the need to resolve at-
tachment ambiguities. this exclusion does lead to certain oddities, such as pps and
vps often consisting solely of their heads. thus, our earlier example a    ight from
indianapolis to houston on nwa is reduced to the following:
(11.6) [np a    ight] [pp from] [np indianapolis][pp to][np houston][pp on][np

nwa]

11.3.1 machine learning-based approaches to chunking
state-of-the-art approaches to chunking use supervised machine learning to train a
chunker by using annotated data as a training set and training any sequence labeler.
it   s common to model chunking as iob tagging. in iob tagging we introduce a tag
for the beginning (b) and inside (i) of each chunk type, and one for tokens outside
(o) any chunk. the number of tags is thus 2n + 1 tags, where n is the number
of chunk types.
iob tagging can represent exactly the same information as the
bracketed notation. the following example shows the bracketing notation of (11.4)
on page 10 reframed as a tagging task:
(11.7) the

morning
i np

   ight
i np

from
b pp

denver
b np

has
b vp

arrived
i vp

b np

chunking

iob

11.3

    partial parsing

11

figure 11.8 a sequence model for chunking. the chunker slides a context window over the sentence, clas-
sifying words as it proceeds. at this point, the classi   er is attempting to label    ight, using features like words,
embeddings, part-of-speech tags and previously assigned chunk tags.

the same sentence with only the base-nps tagged illustrates the role of the o tags.

(11.8) the

b np

morning
i np

   ight
i np

from
o

denver
b np

has
o

arrived.
o

there is no explicit encoding of the end of a chunk in iob tagging; the end of any
chunk is implicit in any transition from an i or b to a b or o tag. this encoding
re   ects the notion that when sequentially labeling words, it is generally easier (at
least in english) to detect the beginning of a new chunk than it is to know when a
chunk has ended.

since annotation efforts are expensive and time consuming, chunkers usually
rely on existing treebanks like the id32 (chapter 10), extracting syntactic
phrases from the full parse constituents of a sentence,    nding the appropriate heads
and then including the material to the left of the head, ignoring the text to the right.
this is somewhat error-prone since it relies on the accuracy of the head-   nding rules
described in chapter 10.

given a training set, any sequence model can be used. figure 11.8 shows an
illustration of a simple feature-based model, using features like the words and parts-
of-speech within a 2 word window, and the chunk tags of the preceding inputs in the
window. in training, each training vector would consist of the values of 13 features;
the two words to the left of the decision point, their parts-of-speech and chunk tags,
the word to be tagged along with its part-of-speech, the two words that follow along
with their parts-of speech, and the correct chunk tag, in this case, i np. during
classi   cation, the classi   er is given the same vector without the answer and assigns
the most appropriate tag from its tagset. viterbi decoding is commonly used.

b_npi_np?     theflightfromdenverhasarrived classifierdtnnnninnnpcorresponding feature representationthe, dt, b_np, morning, nn, i_np, flight, nn, from, in, denver, nnplabeli_npmorning12 chapter 11

    syntactic parsing

11.3.2 chunking-system evaluations
as with the evaluation of part-of-speech taggers, the evaluation of chunkers pro-
ceeds by comparing chunker output with gold-standard answers provided by human
annotators. however, unlike part-of-speech tagging, word-by-word accuracy mea-
sures are not appropriate. instead, chunkers are evaluated according to the notions of
precision, recall, and the f-measure borrowed from the    eld of information retrieval.
precision measures the percentage of system-provided chunks that were correct.
correct here means that both the boundaries of the chunk and the chunk   s label are
correct. precision is therefore de   ned as

precision: =

number of correct chunks given by system
total number of chunks given by system

recall measures the percentage of chunks actually present in the input that were

correctly identi   ed by the system. recall is de   ned as
number of correct chunks given by system
total number of actual chunks in the text

recall: =

precision

recall

f-measure

the f-measure (van rijsbergen, 1975) provides a way to combine these two

measures into a single metric. the f-measure is de   ned as

f   =

(   2 + 1)pr
   2p + r

the    parameter differentially weights the importance of recall and precision,
based perhaps on the needs of an application. values of    > 1 favor recall, while
values of    < 1 favor precision. when    = 1, precision and recall are equally bal-
anced; this is sometimes called f   =1 or just f1:
2pr
p + r

(11.9)

f1 =

f-measure comes from a weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall. the
harmonic mean of a set of numbers is the reciprocal of the arithmetic mean of recip-
rocals:

harmonicmean(a1,a2,a3,a4, ...,an) =

1
a1

+ 1
a2

(cid:19)

n
+ 1
a3

+ ... + 1
an

(11.10)

f =

(   2 + 1)pr
   2p + r

(11.11)

with    2 =

1      
  

and hence f-measure is

f =

1

p + (1      ) 1
   1

r

(cid:18)

or

11.4 summary

the two major ideas introduced in this chapter are those of parsing and partial
parsing. here   s a summary of the main points we covered about these ideas:

    structural ambiguity is a signi   cant problem for parsers. common sources
of structural ambiguity include pp-attachment, coordination ambiguity,
and noun-phrase bracketing ambiguity.
    id145 parsing algorithms, such as cky, use a table of

partial parses to ef   ciently parse ambiguous sentences.

bibliographical and historical notes

13

    cky restricts the form of the grammar to chomsky normal form (cnf).
    many practical problems, including information extraction problems, can be

solved without full parsing.

    partial parsing and chunking are methods for identifying shallow syntactic

    state-of-the-art methods for partial parsing use supervised machine learning

constituents in a text.

techniques.

bibliographical and historical notes

writing about the history of compilers, knuth notes:

in this    eld there has been an unusual amount of parallel discovery of
the same technique by people working independently.

wfst

well, perhaps not unusual, since multiple discovery is the norm in science (see
page ??). but there has certainly been enough parallel publication that this his-
tory errs on the side of succinctness in giving only a characteristic early mention of
each algorithm; the interested reader should see aho and ullman (1972).

bottom-up parsing seems to have been    rst described by yngve (1955), who
gave a breadth-   rst, bottom-up parsing algorithm as part of an illustration of a ma-
chine translation procedure. top-down approaches to parsing and translation were
described (presumably independently) by at least glennie (1960), irons (1961), and
kuno and oettinger (1963). id145 parsing, once again, has a his-
tory of independent discovery. according to martin kay (personal communication),
a id145 parser containing the roots of the cky algorithm was    rst
implemented by john cocke in 1960. later work extended and formalized the algo-
rithm, as well as proving its time complexity (kay 1967,younger 1967,kasami 1965).
the related well-formed substring table (wfst) seems to have been indepen-
dently proposed by kuno (1965) as a data structure that stores the results of all pre-
vious computations in the course of the parse. based on a generalization of cocke   s
work, a similar data structure had been independently described in kay 1967, kay 1973.
the top-down application of id145 to parsing was described in
earley   s ph.d. dissertation (earley 1968, earley 1970). sheil (1976) showed the
equivalence of the wfst and the earley algorithm. norvig (1991) shows that the
ef   ciency offered by id145 can be captured in any language with a
memoization function (such as in lisp) simply by wrapping the memoization oper-
ation around a simple top-down parser.

while parsing via cascades of    nite-state automata had been common in the
early history of parsing (harris, 1962), the focus shifted to full id18 parsing quite
soon afterward. church (1980) argued for a return to    nite-state grammars as a
processing model for natural language understanding; other early    nite-state parsing
models include ejerhed (1988). abney (1991) argued for the important practical role
of id66.

the classic reference for parsing algorithms is aho and ullman (1972); although
the focus of that book is on computer languages, most of the algorithms have been
applied to natural language. a good programming languages textbook such as aho
et al. (1986) is also useful.

14 chapter 11

    syntactic parsing

exercises

11.1 implement the algorithm to convert arbitrary context-free grammars to cnf.

apply your program to the l1 grammar.

11.2 implement the cky algorithm and test it with your converted l1 grammar.
11.3 rewrite the cky algorithm given in fig. 11.5 on page 6 so that it can accept

grammars that contain unit productions.

11.4 discuss the relative advantages and disadvantages of partial versus full pars-

ing.

11.5 discuss how to augment a parser to deal with input that may be incorrect, for
example, containing spelling errors or mistakes arising from automatic speech
recognition.

exercises

15

van rijsbergen, c. j. (1975). information retrieval. butter-

worths.

yngve, v. h. (1955). syntax and the problem of multiple
meaning. in locke, w. n. and booth, a. d. (eds.), ma-
chine translation of languages, pp. 208   226. mit press.
younger, d. h. (1967). recognition and parsing of context-
free languages in time n3.
information and control, 10,
189   208.

abney, s. p. (1991).

parsing by chunks.

in berwick,
r. c., abney, s. p., and tenny, c. (eds.), principle-based
parsing: computation and psycholinguistics, pp. 257   278.
kluwer.

aho, a. v., sethi, r., and ullman, j. d. (1986). compilers:

principles, techniques, and tools. addison-wesley.

aho, a. v. and ullman, j. d. (1972). the theory of parsing,

translation, and compiling, vol. 1. prentice hall.

church, k. w. (1980). on memory limitations in natural
language processing master   s thesis, mit. distributed by
the indiana university linguistics club.

earley, j. (1968). an ef   cient context-free parsing algo-
rithm. ph.d. thesis, carnegie mellon university, pitts-
burgh, pa.

earley, j. (1970). an ef   cient context-free parsing algorithm.
communications of the acm, 6(8), 451   455. reprinted in
grosz et al. (1986).

ejerhed, e. i. (1988). finding clauses in unrestricted text by
   nitary and stochastic methods. in anlp 1988, pp. 219   
227.

glennie, a. (1960). on the syntax machine and the construc-
tion of a universal compiler. tech. rep. no. 2, contr. nr
049-141, carnegie mellon university (at the time carnegie
institute of technology), pittsburgh, pa.

harris, z. s. (1962). string analysis of sentence structure.

mouton, the hague.

irons, e. t. (1961). a syntax directed compiler for algol

60. communications of the acm, 4, 51   55.

kaplan, r. m. (1973). a general syntactic processor.

in
rustin, r. (ed.), natural language processing, pp. 193   
241. algorithmics press.

kasami, t. (1965). an ef   cient recognition and syntax
analysis algorithm for context-free languages. tech. rep.
afcrl-65-758, air force cambridge research labora-
tory, bedford, ma.

kay, m. (1967). experiments with a powerful parser.

in
proc. 2eme conference internationale sur le traitement
automatique des langues, grenoble.
kay, m. (1973). the mind system.

in rustin, r. (ed.),
natural language processing, pp. 155   188. algorithmics
press.

kay, m. (1982). algorithm schemata and data structures in
syntactic processing. in all  en, s. (ed.), text processing:
text analysis and generation, text typology and attribu-
tion, pp. 327   358. almqvist and wiksell, stockholm.

kuno, s. (1965). the predictive analyzer and a path elimi-
nation technique. communications of the acm, 8(7), 453   
462.

kuno, s. and oettinger, a. g. (1963). multiple-path syn-
in popplewell, c. m. (ed.), information
tactic analyzer.
processing 1962: proceedings of the ifip congress 1962,
munich, pp. 306   312. north-holland. reprinted in grosz
et al. (1986).

norvig, p. (1991). techniques for automatic memoization
with applications to context-free parsing. computational
linguistics, 17(1), 91   98.

sheil, b. a. (1976). observations on context free parsing.

smil: statistical methods in linguistics, 1, 71   109.

