computing with affective lexicons 
affective, sentimental, and connotative meaning in the lexicon
affective meaning
drawing on literatures in
affective computing (picard 95)
linguistic subjectivity (wiebe and colleagues)
social psychology (pennebaker and colleagues)
can we model the lexical semantics relevant to:
sentiment
emotion
personality
mood 
attitudes

2
why compute affective meaning?
detecting:
sentiment towards politicians, products, countries, ideas
frustration of callers to a help line
stress in drivers or pilots
depression and other medical conditions
confusion in students talking to e-tutors
emotions in novels (e.g., for studying groups that are feared over time)
could we generate:
emotions or moods for literacy tutors in the children   s storybook domain
emotions or moods for computer games
personalities for dialogue systems to match the user
connotation in the lexicon
words have connotation as well as sense
can we build lexical resources that represent these connotations?
and use them in these computational tasks?
4
scherer   s typology of affective states
emotion: relatively brief episode of synchronized response of all or most organismic subsystems in response to the evaluation of an event as being of major significance
angry, sad, joyful, fearful, ashamed, proud, desperate
mood: diffuse affect state    change in subjective feeling, of low intensity but relatively long duration, often without apparent cause
cheerful, gloomy, irritable, listless, depressed, buoyant
interpersonal stance: affective stance taken toward another person in a specific interaction, coloring the interpersonal exchange
distant, cold, warm, supportive, contemptuous
attitudes: relatively enduring, affectively colored beliefs, preferences predispositions towards objects or persons 
liking, loving, hating, valuing, desiring
personality traits: emotionally laden, stable personality dispositions and behavior tendencies, typical for a person
nervous, anxious, reckless, morose, hostile, envious, jealous
computing with affective lexicons 
sentiment lexicons
scherer   s typology of affective states
emotion: relatively brief episode of synchronized response of all or most organismic subsystems in response to the evaluation of an event as being of major significance
angry, sad, joyful, fearful, ashamed, proud, desperate
mood: diffuse affect state    change in subjective feeling, of low intensity but relatively long duration, often without apparent cause
cheerful, gloomy, irritable, listless, depressed, buoyant
interpersonal stance: affective stance taken toward another person in a specific interaction, coloring the interpersonal exchange
distant, cold, warm, supportive, contemptuous
attitudes: relatively enduring, affectively colored beliefs, preferences predispositions towards objects or persons 
liking, loving, hating, valuing, desiring
personality traits: emotionally laden, stable personality dispositions and behavior tendencies, typical for a person
nervous, anxious, reckless, morose, hostile, envious, jealous
the general inquirer
home page: http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~inquirer
list of categories:  http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~inquirer/homecat.htm
spreadsheet: http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~inquirer/inquirerbasic.xls
categories:
positiv (1915 words) and negativ (2291 words)
strong vs weak, active vs passive, overstated versus understated
pleasure, pain, virtue, vice, motivation, cognitive orientation, etc
free for research use
philip j. stone, dexter c dunphy, marshall s. smith, daniel m. ogilvie. 1966. the general inquirer: a computer approach to content analysis. mit press
liwc (linguistic inquiry and word count)
pennebaker, j.w., booth, r.j., & francis, m.e. (2007). linguistic inquiry and word count: liwc 2007. austin, tx
home page: http://www.liwc.net/
2300 words, >70 classes
affective processes
negative emotion (bad, weird, hate, problem, tough)
positive emotion (love, nice, sweet)
cognitive processes
tentative (maybe, perhaps, guess), inhibition (block, constraint)
pronouns, negation (no, never), quantifiers (few, many) 
$30 or $90 fee
mpqa subjectivity cues lexicon
home page: http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/subj_lexicon.html
6885 words from 8221 lemmas
2718 positive
4912 negative
each word annotated for intensity (strong, weak)
gnu gpl

10
theresa wilson, janyce wiebe, and paul hoffmann (2005). recognizing contextual polarity in 
phrase-level id31. proc. of hlt-emnlp-2005.

riloff and wiebe (2003). learning extraction patterns for subjective expressions. emnlp-2003.

bing liu opinion lexicon
bing liu's page on opinion mining
http://www.cs.uic.edu/~liub/fbs/opinion-lexicon-english.rar

6786 words
2006 positive
4783 negative

11
minqing hu and bing liu. mining and summarizing customer reviews. acm sigkdd-2004.
sentiid138
stefano baccianella, andrea esuli, and fabrizio sebastiani. 2010 sentiid138 3.0: an enhanced lexical resource for id31 and opinion mining. lrec-2010
home page: http://sentiid138.isti.cnr.it/
all id138 synsets automatically annotated for degrees of positivity, negativity, and neutrality/objectiveness
 [estimable(j,3)]    may be computed or estimated    
	pos  0   neg 0   obj 1 
[estimable(j,1)]    deserving of respect or high regard    
	pos .75  neg 0   obj .25 

computing with affective lexicons 
sentiment lexicons
computing with affective lexicons 
other affective lexicons
scherer   s typology of affective states
emotion: relatively brief episode of synchronized response of all or most organismic subsystems in response to the evaluation of an event as being of major significance
angry, sad, joyful, fearful, ashamed, proud, desperate
mood: diffuse affect state    change in subjective feeling, of low intensity but relatively long duration, often without apparent cause
cheerful, gloomy, irritable, listless, depressed, buoyant
interpersonal stance: affective stance taken toward another person in a specific interaction, coloring the interpersonal exchange
distant, cold, warm, supportive, contemptuous
attitudes: relatively enduring, affectively colored beliefs, preferences predispositions towards objects or persons 
liking, loving, hating, valuing, desiring
personality traits: emotionally laden, stable personality dispositions and behavior tendencies, typical for a person
nervous, anxious, reckless, morose, hostile, envious, jealous
two families of theories of emotion
atomic basic emotions
a finite list of 6 or 8, from which others are generated
dimensions of emotion
valence (positive negative)
arousal (strong, weak)
control
16
ekman   s 6 basic emotions:
surprise, happiness, anger, fear, disgust, sadness
valence/arousal dimensions
 


 high arousal, low pleasure                     high arousal, high pleasure
                  anger                                                   excitement


low arousal, low pleasure                      low arousal, high pleasure
                    sadness                                                 relaxation




arousal
valence
atomic units vs. dimensions
distinctive
emotions are units.
limited number of basic emotions.	
basic emotions are innate and universal
dimensional
emotions are dimensions.
limited # of labels but unlimited number of emotions.
emotions are culturally learned.
adapted from julia braverman
one emotion lexicon from each paradigm!
8 basic emotions:
nrc word-emotion association lexicon (mohammad and turney 2011)
dimensions of valence/arousal/dominance
warriner, a. b.,  kuperman, v., and brysbaert, m. (2013)

both built using amazon mechanical turk
20
plutchick   s wheel of emotion
21
8 basic emotions
in four opposing pairs:
joy   sadness 
anger   fear
trust   disgust
anticipation   surprise 

nrc word-emotion association lexicon
22
mohammad and turney 2011
10,000 words chosen mainly from earlier lexicons
labeled by amazon mechanical turk
5 turkers per hit
give turkers an idea of the relevant sense of the word
result:
amazingly   anger   0
amazingly   anticipation    0
amazingly   disgust 0
amazingly   fear    0
amazingly   joy 1
amazingly   sadness 0
amazingly   surprise    1
amazingly   trust   0
amazingly   negative    0
amazingly   positive    1
the amt hit
23
   
lexicon of valence, arousal, and dominance

warriner, a. b.,  kuperman, v., and brysbaert, m. (2013).  norms of valence, arousal, and dominance for 13,915 english lemmas.  behavior research methods 45, 1191-1207.
supplementary data:  this work is licensed under a  creative commons attribution-noncommercial-noderivs 3.0 unported license.

ratings for 14,000 words for emotional dimensions:
valence (the pleasantness of the stimulus) 
arousal (the intensity of emotion provoked by the stimulus)
dominance (the degree of control exerted by the stimulus) 
24
lexicon of valence, arousal, and dominance
valence (the pleasantness of the stimulus) 
9: happy, pleased, satisfied, contented, hopeful 
1: unhappy, annoyed, unsatisfied, melancholic, despaired, or bored 
arousal (the intensity of emotion provoked by the stimulus)
9: stimulated, excited, frenzied, jittery, wide-awake, or aroused
1: relaxed, calm, sluggish, dull, sleepy, or unaroused;
dominance (the degree of control exerted by the stimulus) 
9: in control, influential, important, dominant, autonomous, or controlling
1: controlled, influenced, cared-for, awed, submissive, or guided
again produced by amt
25
lexicon of valence, arousal, and dominance:
examples
26
concreteness versus abstractness
the degree to which the concept denoted by a word refers to a perceptible entity.
do concrete and abstract words differ in connotation?
storage and retrieval?
bilingual processing?
relevant for embodied view of cognition (barsalou 1999 inter alia)
do concrete words activate brain regions involved in relevant perception
brysbaert, m., warriner, a. b., and  kuperman, v. (2014)  concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally known english word lemmas  behavior research methods 46, 904-911.
supplementary data:  this work is licensed under a  creative commons attribution-noncommercial-noderivs 3.0 unported license.
37,058 english words and 2,896 two-word expressions (    zebra crossing    and    zoom in   ), 
rating from 1 (abstract) to 5 (concrete)
calibrator words:
shirt, infinity, gas, grasshopper, marriage, kick, polite, whistle, theory, and sugar 



27
concreteness versus abstractness
brysbaert, m., warriner, a. b., and  kuperman, v. (2014)  concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally known english word lemmas  behavior research methods 46, 904-911.
supplementary data:  this work is licensed under a  creative commons attribution-noncommercial-noderivs 3.0 unported license.
some example ratings from the final dataset of 40,000 words and phrases
banana 5
bathrobe 5
bagel 5
brisk 2.5
badass 2.5
basically 1.32
belief 1.19
although 1.07


28
perceptual strength norms
connell and lynott norms
29
computing with affective lexicons 
semi-supervised algorithms for learning sentiment lexicons
semi-supervised learning of lexicons
use a small amount of information
a few labeled examples
a few hand-built patterns
to bootstrap a lexicon
31
hatzivassiloglou and mckeown intuition for identifying word polarity
adjectives conjoined by    and    have same polarity
fair and legitimate, corrupt and brutal
*fair and brutal, *corrupt and legitimate
adjectives conjoined by    but    do not
fair but brutal

32
vasileios hatzivassiloglou and kathleen r. mckeown. 1997. predicting the semantic orientation of adjectives. acl, 174   181
hatzivassiloglou & mckeown 1997
step 1
label seed set of 1336 adjectives (all >20 in 21 million word wsj corpus)
657 positive
adequate central clever famous intelligent remarkable reputed sensitive slender thriving   
679 negative
contagious drunken ignorant lanky listless primitive strident troublesome unresolved unsuspecting   

33
hatzivassiloglou & mckeown 1997
step 2
expand seed set to conjoined adjectives

34
nice, helpful
nice, classy



hatzivassiloglou & mckeown 1997
step 3
supervised classifier assigns    polarity similarity    to each word pair, resulting in graph:
35
classy
nice
helpful
fair
brutal
irrational
corrupt
hatzivassiloglou & mckeown 1997
step 4
id91 for partitioning the graph into two
36
classy
nice
helpful
fair
brutal
irrational
corrupt


+
-
output polarity lexicon
positive
bold decisive disturbing generous good honest important large mature patient peaceful positive proud sound stimulating straightforward strange talented vigorous witty   
negative
ambiguous cautious cynical evasive harmful hypocritical inefficient insecure irrational irresponsible minor outspoken pleasant reckless risky selfish tedious unsupported vulnerable wasteful   
37
output polarity lexicon
positive
bold decisive disturbing generous good honest important large mature patient peaceful positive proud sound stimulating straightforward strange talented vigorous witty   
negative
ambiguous cautious cynical evasive harmful hypocritical inefficient insecure irrational irresponsible minor outspoken pleasant reckless risky selfish tedious unsupported vulnerable wasteful   
38
turney algorithm
extract a phrasal lexicon from reviews
learn polarity of each phrase
rate a review by the average polarity of its phrases
39
turney (2002):  thumbs up or thumbs down? semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews
extract two-word phrases with adjectives
40
how to measure polarity of a phrase?
positive phrases co-occur more with    excellent   
negative phrases co-occur more with    poor   
but how to measure co-occurrence?
41
pointwise mutual information
mutual information between 2 random variables x and y


pointwise mutual information: 
how much more do events x and y co-occur than if they were independent?


pointwise mutual information
pointwise mutual information: 
how much more do events x and y co-occur than if they were independent?



pmi between two words:
 how much more do two words co-occur than if they were independent?


how to estimate pointwise mutual information
query search engine  (altavista)
p(word) estimated by    hits(word)/n
p(word1,word2) by   hits(word1 near word2)/n
(more correctly the bigram denominator should be kn, because there are a total of n consecutive bigrams (word1,word2), but kn bigrams that are k words apart, but we just use n on the rest of this slide and the next.)




does phrase appear more with    poor    or    excellent   ?
45
phrases from a thumbs-up review
46
phrases from a thumbs-down review
47
results of turney algorithm
410 reviews from epinions
170 (41%) negative
240 (59%) positive
majority class baseline: 59%
turney algorithm: 74%

phrases rather than words
learns domain-specific information
48
using id138 to learn polarity
id138: online thesuarus
create positive (   good   ) and negative seed-words (   terrible   )
find synonyms and antonyms
positive set:  add  synonyms of positive words (   well   ) and antonyms of negative words 
negative set: add synonyms of negative words (   awful   )  and antonyms of positive words (   evil   )
repeat, following chains of synonyms
filter
49
 s.m. kim and e. hovy. 2004. determining the sentiment of opinions. coling 2004
m. hu and b. liu. mining and summarizing customer reviews. in proceedings of kdd, 2004
summary on semi-supervised lexicon learning
advantages:
can be domain-specific
can be more robust (more words)
intuition
start with a seed set of words (   good   ,    poor   )
find other words that have similar polarity:
using    and    and    but   
using words that occur nearby in the same document
using id138 synonyms and antonyms


use seeds and semi-supervised learning to induce lexicons
computing with affective lexicons 
supervised learning of sentiment lexicons
learn word sentiment supervised by online review scores
review datasets
imdb, goodreads, open table, amazon, trip advisor
each review has a score (1-5, 1-10, etc)
just count how many times each word occurs with each score
(and normalize)

52
potts, christopher. 2011. on the negativity of negation.  salt  20, 636-659.
potts 2011 nsf workshop talk.
analyzing the polarity of each word in imdb
how likely is each word to appear in each sentiment class?
count(   bad   ) in 1-star, 2-star, 3-star, etc.
but can   t use raw counts: 
instead, likelihood:

make them comparable between words
scaled likelihood:
potts, christopher. 2011. on the negativity of negation.  salt  20, 636-659.
   potts diagrams   
potts, christopher. 2011. nsf workshop on restructuring adjectives.
good
great
excellent
disappointing
bad
terrible
totally
absolutely
utterly
somewhat
fairly
pretty
positive scalars
negative scalars
emphatics
attenuators
or use regression coefficients to weight words
train a classifier based on supervised data
predict: human-labeled connotation of a document 
from: all the words and bigrams in it
use the regression coefficients as the  weights
we   ll return to an example of this in the next section.
55
computing with affective lexicons 
using the lexicons to detect affect
lexicons for detecting document affect:
simplest unsupervised method
sentiment:
sum the weights of each positive word in the document
sum the weights of each negative word in the document
choose whichever value (positive or negative)  has higher sum
emotion:
do the same for each emotion lexicon
57
lexicons for detecting document affect:
simplest supervised method
build a classifier
predict sentiment (or emotion, or personality) given features
use    counts of lexicon categories    as a features
sample features:
liwc category    cognition    had count of 7
nrc emotion category    anticipation    had count of 2
baseline
instead use counts of all the words and bigrams in the training set
this is hard to beat
but only works if the training and test sets are very similar
58
computing with affective lexicons 
sample affective task: personality detection
sample affective task: personality detection 

60
scherer   s typology of affective states
emotion: relatively brief episode of synchronized response of all or most organismic subsystems in response to the evaluation of an event as being of major significance
angry, sad, joyful, fearful, ashamed, proud, desperate
mood: diffuse affect state    change in subjective feeling, of low intensity but relatively long duration, often without apparent cause
cheerful, gloomy, irritable, listless, depressed, buoyant
interpersonal stance: affective stance taken toward another person in a specific interaction, coloring the interpersonal exchange
distant, cold, warm, supportive, contemptuous
attitudes: relatively enduring, affectively colored beliefs, preferences predispositions towards objects or persons 
liking, loving, hating, valuing, desiring
personality traits: emotionally laden, stable personality dispositions and behavior tendencies, typical for a person
nervous, anxious, reckless, morose, hostile, envious, jealous
62
the big five dimensions of personality
extraversion vs. introversion 	
  sociable, assertive, playful vs. aloof, reserved, shy
emotional stability vs. neuroticism
  calm, unemotional vs. insecure, anxious
agreeableness vs. disagreeable 
  friendly, cooperative vs. antagonistic, faultfinding
conscientiousness vs. unconscientious 
  self-disciplined, organised vs. inefficient, careless
openness to experience 
  intellectual, insightful vs. shallow, unimaginative
various text corpora labeled for personality of author
pennebaker, james w., and laura a. king. 1999. "linguistic styles: language use as an individual difference." journal of personality and social psychology 77, no. 6.
2,479 essays from psychology students (1.9 million words),    write whatever comes into your mind    for 20 minutes
mehl, matthias r, sd gosling, jw pennebaker. 2006.  personality in its natural habitat: manifestations and implicit folk theories of personality in daily life.  journal of personality and social psychology 90 (5), 862
speech from electronically activated recorder (ear) 
random snippets of conversation recorded, transcribed
96 participants, total of 97,468 words and 15,269 utterances
schwartz, h. andrew, johannes c. eichstaedt, margaret l. kern, lukasz dziurzynski, stephanie m. ramones, megha agrawal, achal shah et al. 2013. "personality, gender, and age in the language of social media: the open-vocabulary approach." plos one 8, no. 9 
facebook
75,000 volunteers
309 million words
all took a personality test
ears (speech) corpus (mehl et al.)
essays corpus (pennebaker and king)
classifiers
mairesse, fran  ois, marilyn a. walker, matthias r. mehl, and roger k. moore. "using linguistic cues for the automatic recognition of personality in conversation and text." journal of artificial intelligence research (2007): 457-500.
various classifiers, lexicon-based and prosodic features
schwartz, h. andrew, johannes c. eichstaedt, margaret l. kern, lukasz dziurzynski, stephanie m. ramones, megha agrawal, achal shah et al. 2013. "personality, gender, and age in the language of social media: the open-vocabulary approach." plos one 8, no.
regression and id166, lexicon-based and all-words
66
sample liwc features
liwc (linguistic inquiry and word count)
pennebaker, j.w., booth, r.j., & francis, m.e. (2007). linguistic inquiry and word count: liwc 2007. austin, tx

normalizing liwc category features
(schwartz et al 2013, facebook study)
68
mairesse:
	raw liwc counts
schwartz  et al:
	normalized per writer:
sample results
agreeable: 
+family, +home, -anger, -swear
extravert
+friend, +religion, +self
conscientiousness:
-swear, -anger, -negemotion, 
emotional stability: 
-negemotion, +sports, 
openness
-cause, -space
69
decision tree for predicting extraversion
in essay corpus (mairesse et al)
70
using all words instead of lexicons
facebook study
schwartz et al. (2013)
choosing phrases with pmi > 2*length  [in words]


only use words/phrases used by at least 1% of writers
normalize counts of  words and phrases by writer
71
facebook study, learned words, 
extraversion versus introversion












facebook study, learned words
neuroticism versus emotional stability
73






















evaluating schwartz et al (2013) facebook classifier
train on labeled training data
liwc category counts 
words and phrases (id165s of size 1 to 3, passing a collocation filter 
tested on a held-out set
correlations with human labels
liwc   .21-.29
all words  .29-.41

74
affect extraction: 
of course it   s not just the lexicon
detecting interpersonal stance in conversation
speed dating study, 1000 4-minute speed dates
subjects labeled selves and each other for 
friendly (each on a scale of 1-10)
awkward
flirtatious
assertive
75
ranganath et al (2013), mcfarland et al (2014)
scherer   s typology of affective states
emotion: relatively brief episode of synchronized response of all or most organismic subsystems in response to the evaluation of an event as being of major significance
angry, sad, joyful, fearful, ashamed, proud, desperate
mood: diffuse affect state    change in subjective feeling, of low intensity but relatively long duration, often without apparent cause
cheerful, gloomy, irritable, listless, depressed, buoyant
interpersonal stance: affective stance taken toward another person in a specific interaction, coloring the interpersonal exchange
distant, cold, warm, supportive, contemptuous
attitudes: relatively enduring, affectively colored beliefs, preferences predispositions towards objects or persons 
liking, loving, hating, valuing, desiring
personality traits: emotionally laden, stable personality dispositions and behavior tendencies, typical for a person
nervous, anxious, reckless, morose, hostile, envious, jealous
affect extraction:  of course it   s not just the lexicon
id28 classifier with
liwc lexicons
other lexical features
lists of hedges
id144 (pitch and energy means and variance)
discourse features
interruptions 
dialog acts/adjacency pairs 
sympathy (   oh, that   s terrible   )
clarification question (   what?   )
appreciations (   that   s awesom!   )
77
results on affect extraction
friendliness
-negemotion
-hedge
higher pitch
awkwardness
+negation
+hedges
+questions
78
scherer   s typology of affective states
emotion: relatively brief episode of synchronized response of all or most organismic subsystems in response to the evaluation of an event as being of major significance
angry, sad, joyful, fearful, ashamed, proud, desperate
mood: diffuse affect state    change in subjective feeling, of low intensity but relatively long duration, often without apparent cause
cheerful, gloomy, irritable, listless, depressed, buoyant
interpersonal stance: affective stance taken toward another person in a specific interaction, coloring the interpersonal exchange
distant, cold, warm, supportive, contemptuous
attitudes: relatively enduring, affectively colored beliefs, preferences predispositions towards objects or persons 
liking, loving, hating, valuing, desiring
personality traits: emotionally laden, stable personality dispositions and behavior tendencies, typical for a person
nervous, anxious, reckless, morose, hostile, envious, jealous
summary: connotation in the lexicon
words have various connotational aspects
methods for building connotation lexicons
based on theoretical models of emotion, sentiment
by hand (mainly using id104)
semi-supervised learning from seed words
fully supervised (when you can find a convenient signal in the world)
applying lexicons to detect affect and sentiment
unsupervised: pick simple majority sentiment (positive/negative words)
supervised: learn weights for each lexical category

80
