selectional restrictions

selectional restrictions
introduction
selectional restrictions
consider the two interpretations of:
	i want to eat someplace nearby. 
sensible:	
eat is intransitive and    someplace nearby    is a location adjunct
speaker is godzilla
     eat is transitive and    someplace nearby    is a direct object
how do we know speaker didn   t mean b)  ?
	because the theme of eating tends to be something edible


3
selectional restrictions are associated with senses
the restaurant serves green-lipped mussels. 
theme is some kind of food
which airlines serve denver? 
theme is an appropriate location

4
selectional restrictions vary in specificity
i often ask the musicians to imagine a tennis game.
to diagonalize a matrix is to find its eigenvalues. 
radon is an odorless gas that can   t be detected by human senses. 


5
representing selectional restrictions
6
instead of representing    eat    as:
just add:
and    eat a hamburger    becomes
but this assumes we have a large knowledge base of facts about edible things and hamburgers and whatnot.
let   s use id138 synsets to specify selectional restrictions
the theme of eat must be id138 synset {food, nutrient} 
   any substance that can be metabolized by an animal to give energy and build tissue   
similarly
theme of imagine: synset {entity}
theme of lift: synset {physical entity}
theme of diagonalize: synset {matrix} 
this allows
imagine a hamburger  and  lift a hamburger, 
correctly rules out 
diagonalize a hamburger. 


7
selectional restrictions
selectional preferences
selectional preferences
in early implementations, selectional restrictions were strict constraints (katz and fodor 1963)
eat [+food]
but it was quickly realized selectional constraints are really preferences (wilks 1975)
but it fell apart in 1931, perhaps because people realized you can   t eat gold for lunch if you   re hungry. 
in his two championship trials, mr. kulkarni ate glass on an empty stomach, accompanied only by water and tea. 


9
selectional association (resnik 1993)
selectional preference strength: amount of information that a predicate tells us about the semantic class of its arguments. 
eat tells us a lot about the semantic class of its direct objects
be doesn   t tell us much
the selectional preference strength 
difference in information between two distributions: 
p(c) the distribution of expected semantic classes for any direct object
p(c|v) the distribution of expected semantic classes for this verb
the greater the difference, the more the verb is constraining its object
10
selectional preference strength
relative id178, or the id181 is the difference between two distributions


selectional preference: how much information (in bits) the verb expresses about the semantic class of its argument


selectional association of a verb with a class: the relative contribution of the class to the general preference of the verb
11
computing selectional association
a probabilistic measure of the strength of association between a predicate and a semantic class of its argument
parse a corpus
count all the times each predicate appears with each argument word
assume each word is a partial observation of all the id138 concepts associated with that word
some high and low associations:
12
results from similar models
13
   s  aghdha and korhonen (2012)
instead of using classes,
a simpler model of selectional association
model just the association of predicate v with a noun n
  (one noun, as opposed to the whole semantic class in id138)
parse a huge corpus
count how often a noun n occurs in relation r with verb v:
		log count(n,v,r)
or the id203:
14
evaluation from bergsma, lin, goebel
15
selectional restrictions
conclusion
summary: selectional restrictions
two classes of models of the semantic type constraint that a predicate places on its argument:
represent the constraint between predicate and id138 class
represent the constraint between predicate and a word
one fun recent use case: detecting metonomy (type coercion)
coherent with selectional restrictions:
the spokesman denied the statement (proposition). 
the child threw the stone (physical object) 
coercion:
the president denied the attack (event     proposition). 
the white house (location     human) denied the statement. 


17
pustejovsky et al (2010)
