ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

1

a brief survey of deep id23

kai arulkumaran, marc peter deisenroth, miles brundage, anil anthony bharath

7
1
0
2

 

p
e
s
8
2

 

 
 
]

g
l
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
6
6
8
5
0

.

8
0
7
1
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract   deep id23 is poised to revolu-
tionise the    eld of ai and represents a step towards building
autonomous systems with a higher level understanding of the
visual world. currently, deep learning is enabling reinforcement
learning to scale to problems that were previously intractable,
such as learning to play video games directly from pixels. deep
id23 algorithms are also applied to robotics,
allowing control policies for robots to be learned directly from
camera inputs in the real world. in this survey, we begin with
an introduction to the general    eld of id23,
then progress to the main streams of value-based and policy-
based methods. our survey will cover central algorithms in
deep id23,
including the deep q-network,
trust region policy optimisation, and asynchronous advantage
actor-critic. in parallel, we highlight the unique advantages of
deep neural networks, focusing on visual understanding via
id23. to conclude, we describe several current
areas of research within the    eld.

i. introduction

one of the primary goals of the    eld of arti   cial intelligence
(ai) is to produce fully autonomous agents that interact with
their environments to learn optimal behaviours, improving over
time through trial and error. crafting ai systems that are
responsive and can effectively learn has been a long-standing
challenge, ranging from robots, which can sense and react
to the world around them, to purely software-based agents,
which can interact with natural
language and multimedia.
a principled mathematical framework for experience-driven
autonomous learning is id23 (rl) [135]. al-
though rl had some successes in the past [141, 129, 62, 93],
previous approaches lacked scalablity and were inherently
limited to fairly low-dimensional problems. these limitations
exist because rl algorithms share the same complexity is-
sues as other algorithms: memory complexity, computational
complexity, and in the case of machine learning algorithms,
sample complexity [133]. what we have witnessed in recent
years   the rise of deep learning, relying on the powerful
function approximation and representation learning properties
of deep neural networks   has provided us with new tools to
overcoming these problems.

the advent of deep learning has had a signi   cant impact
on many areas in machine learning, dramatically improving
the state-of-the-art in tasks such as id164, speech
recognition, and language translation [70]. the most important
property of deep learning is that deep neural networks can
automatically    nd compact low-dimensional representations
(features) of high-dimensional data (e.g., images, text and
audio). through crafting inductive biases into neural network
architectures, particularly that of hierarchical representations,
machine learning practitioners have made effective progress
in addressing the curse of dimensionality [15]. deep learning
has similarly accelerated progress in rl, with the use of
deep learning algorithms within rl de   ning the    eld of
   deep id23    (drl). the aim of this survey

is to cover both seminal and recent developments in drl,
conveying the innovative ways in which neural networks can
be used to bring us closer towards developing autonomous
agents. for a more comprehensive survey of recent efforts in
drl, including applications of drl to areas such as natural
language processing [106, 5], we refer readers to the overview
by li [78].

deep learning enables rl to scale to decision-making
problems that were previously intractable, i.e., settings with
high-dimensional state and action spaces. amongst recent
work in the    eld of drl, there have been two outstanding
success stories. the    rst, kickstarting the revolution in drl,
was the development of an algorithm that could learn to play
a range of atari 2600 video games at a superhuman level,
directly from image pixels [84]. providing solutions for the
instability of function approximation techniques in rl, this
work was the    rst to convincingly demonstrate that rl agents
could be trained on raw, high-dimensional observations, solely
based on a reward signal. the second standout success was
the development of a hybrid drl system, alphago,
that
defeated a human world champion in go [128], paralleling the
historic achievement of ibm   s deep blue in chess two decades
earlier [19] and ibm   s watson deepqa system that beat the
best human jeopardy! players [31]. unlike the handcrafted
rules that have dominated chess-playing systems, alphago
was composed of neural networks that were trained using
supervised and id23, in combination with
a traditional heuristic search algorithm.

drl algorithms have already been applied to a wide range
of problems, such as robotics, where control policies for robots
can now be learned directly from camera inputs in the real
world [74, 75], succeeding controllers that used to be hand-
engineered or learned from low-dimensional features of the
robot   s state. in a step towards even more capable agents,
drl has been used to create agents that can meta-learn (   learn
to learn   ) [29, 156], allowing them to generalise to complex
visual environments they have never seen before [29]. in
figure 1, we showcase just some of the domains that drl
has been applied to, ranging from playing video games [84]
to indoor navigation [167].

video games may be an interesting challenge, but learning
how to play them is not the end goal of drl. one of the
driving forces behind drl is the vision of creating systems
that are capable of learning how to adapt in the real world.
from managing power consumption [142] to picking and
stowing objects [75], drl stands to increase the amount
of physical tasks that can be automated by learning. how-
ever, drl does not stop there, as rl is a general way of
approaching optimisation problems by trial and error. from
designing state-of-the-art machine translation models [168] to
constructing new optimisation functions [76], drl has already
been used to approach all manner of machine learning tasks.

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

2

fig. 1. a range of visual rl domains. (a) two classic atari 2600 video games,    freeway    and    seaquest   , from the arcade learning environment
(ale) [10]. due to the range of supported games that vary in genre, visuals and dif   culty, the ale has become a standard testbed for drl algorithms
[84, 95, 44, 122, 132, 157, 85]. as we will discuss later, the ale is one of several benchmarks that are now being used to standardise evaluation in rl.
(b) the torcs car racing simulator, which has been used to test drl algorithms that can output continuous actions [64, 79, 85] (as the games from the
ale only support discrete actions). (c) utilising the potentially unlimited amount of training data that can be amassed in robotic simulators, several methods
aim to transfer knowledge from the simulator to the real world [22, 115, 146]. (d) two of the four robotic tasks designed by levine et al. [74]: screwing
on a bottle cap and placing a shaped block in the correct hole. levine et al. [74] were able to train visuomotor policies in an end-to-end fashion, showing
that visual servoing could be learned directly from raw camera inputs by using deep neural networks. (e) a real room, in which a wheeled robot trained to
navigate the building is given a visual cue as input, and must    nd the corresponding location [167]. (f) a natural image being captioned by a neural network
that uses id23 to choose where to look [166]. by processing a small portion of the image for every word generated, the network can focus
its attention on the most salient points. figures reproduced from [10, 79, 146, 74, 167, 166], respectively.

and, in the same way that deep learning has been utilised
across many branches of machine learning, it seems likely
that in the future, drl will be an important component in
constructing general ai systems [68].

ii. reward-driven behaviour

before examining the contributions of deep neural networks
to rl, we will introduce the    eld of rl in general. the
essence of rl is learning through interaction. an rl agent
interacts with its environment and, upon observing the conse-
quences of its actions, can learn to alter its own behaviour in
response to rewards received. this paradigm of trial-and error-
learning has its roots in behaviourist psychology, and is one
of the main foundations of rl [135]. the other key in   uence
on rl is optimal control, which has lent the mathematical
formalisms (most notably id145 [13]) that
underpin the    eld.

in the rl set-up, an autonomous agent, controlled by
a machine learning algorithm, observes a state st from its
environment at timestep t. the agent interacts with the envi-
ronment by taking an action at in state st. when the agent
takes an action, the environment and the agent transition to
a new state st+1 based on the current state and the chosen
action. the state is a suf   cient statistic of the environment

and thereby comprises all the necessary information for the
agent to take the best action, which can include parts of the
agent, such as the position of its actuators and sensors. in the
optimal control literature, states and actions are often denoted
by xt and ut, respectively.

the best sequence of actions is determined by the rewards
provided by the environment. every time the environment
transitions to a new state, it also provides a scalar reward
rt+1 to the agent as feedback. the goal of the agent is to
learn a policy (control strategy)    that maximises the expected
return (cumulative, discounted reward). given a state, a policy
returns an action to perform; an optimal policy is any policy
that maximises the expected return in the environment. in
this respect, rl aims to solve the same problem as optimal
control. however, the challenge in rl is that the agent needs
to learn about the consequences of actions in the environment
by trial and error, as, unlike in optimal control, a model of the
state transition dynamics is not available to the agent. every
interaction with the environment yields information, which the
agent uses to update its knowledge. this perception-action-
learning loop is illustrated in figure 2.

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

3

fig. 2. the perception-action-learning loop. at time t, the agent receives state st from the environment. the agent uses its policy to choose an action at.
once the action is executed, the environment transitions a step, providing the next state st+1 as well as feedback in the form of a reward rt+1. the agent
uses knowledge of state transitions, of the form (st, at, st+1, rt+1), in order to learn and improve its policy.

a. id100

(mdp), which consists of:

p(s0).

formally, rl can be described as a markov decision process
    a set of states s, plus a distribution of starting states
    a set of actions a.
    transition dynamics t (st+1|st, at) that map a state-
action pair at time t onto a distribution of states at time
t + 1.
r(st, at, st+1).

    an
function
    a discount factor        [0, 1], where lower values place

immediate/instantaneous

reward

more emphasis on immediate rewards.

in general, the policy    is a mapping from states to a
id203 distribution over actions:    : s     p(a = a|s). if
the mdp is episodic, i.e., the state is reset after each episode of
length t , then the sequence of states, actions and rewards in an
episode constitutes a trajectory or rollout of the policy. every
rollout of a policy accumulates rewards from the environment,
t=0   trt+1. the goal of rl is
to    nd an optimal policy,      , which achieves the maximum
expected return from all states:

resulting in the return r =(cid:80)t   1

      = argmax

e[r|  ].

  

(1)

it is also possible to consider non-episodic mdps, where
t =    . in this situation,    < 1 prevents an in   nite sum
of rewards from being accumulated. furthermore, methods
that rely on complete trajectories are no longer applicable,
but those that use a    nite set of transitions still are.

a key concept underlying rl is the markov property   
only the current state affects the next state, or in other words,
the future is conditionally independent of the past given
the present state. this means that any decisions made at st
can be based solely on st   1, rather than {s0, s1, . . . , st   1}.
although this assumption is held by the majority of rl
algorithms, it is somewhat unrealistic, as it requires the states
to be fully observable. a generalisation of mdps are partially
observable mdps (pomdps), in which the agent receives an

observation ot        , where the distribution of the observation
p(ot+1|st+1, at) is dependent on the current state and the
previous action [56]. in a control and signal processing con-
text, the observation would be described by a measurement/
observation mapping in a state-space-model that depends on
the current state and the previously applied action.

pomdp algorithms typically maintain a belief over the
current state given the previous belief state, the action taken
and the current observation. a more common approach in
deep learning is to utilise recurrent neural networks (id56s)
[163, 44, 45, 85, 96], which, unlike feedforward neural
networks, are dynamical systems. this approach to solving
pomdps is related to other problems using dynamical systems
and state space models, where the true state can only be
estimated [16].
b. challenges in rl

it is instructive to emphasise some challenges faced in rl:
    the optimal policy must be inferred by trial-and-error
interaction with the environment. the only learning signal
the agent receives is the reward.

    the observations of the agent depend on its actions and

can contain strong temporal correlations.

    agents must deal with long-range time dependencies:
often the consequences of an action only materialise after
many transitions of the environment. this is known as the
(temporal) credit assignment problem [135].

we will illustrate these challenges in the context of an
indoor robotic visual navigation task: if the goal location is
speci   ed, we may be able to estimate the distance remaining
(and use it as a reward signal), but it is unlikely that we will
know exactly what series of actions the robot needs to take
to reach the goal. as the robot must choose where to go as it
navigates the building, its decisions in   uence which rooms it
sees and, hence, the statistics of the visual sequence captured.
finally, after navigating several junctions, the robot may    nd
itself in a dead end. there is a range of problems, from
learning the consequences of actions to balancing exploration

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

4

against exploitation, but ultimately these can all be addressed
formally within the framework of rl.

iii. id23 algorithms

so far, we have introduced the key formalism used in rl,
the mdp, and brie   y noted some challenges in rl. in the
following, we will distinguish between different classes of
rl algorithms. there are two main approaches to solving
rl problems: methods based on value functions and methods
based on policy search. there is also a hybrid, actor-critic
approach, which employs both value functions and policy
search. we will now explain these approaches and other useful
concepts for solving rl problems.
a. value functions

value function methods are based on estimating the value
(expected return) of being in a given state. the state-value
function v   (s) is the expected return when starting in state s
and following    henceforth:

v   (s) = e[r|s,   ]

(2)
the optimal policy,      , has a corresponding state-value
function v    (s), and vice-versa, the optimal state-value func-
tion can be de   ned as

v    (s) = max

v   (s)    s     s.

  

(3)
if we had v    (s) available, the optimal policy could be re-
trieved by choosing among all actions available at st and pick-
ing the action a that maximises est+1   t (st+1|st,a)[v    (st+1)].
in the rl setting, the transition dynamics t are unavailable.
therefore, we construct another function, the state-action-
value or quality function q  (s, a), which is similar to v   ,
except that the initial action a is provided, and    is only
followed from the succeeding state onwards:
q  (s, a) = e[r|s, a,   ].

(4)

the best policy, given q  (s, a), can be found by choosing a
greedily at every state: argmaxa q  (s, a). under this policy,
we can also de   ne v   (s) by maximising q  (s, a): v   (s) =
maxa q  (s, a).

id145: to actually learn q  , we exploit
the markov property and de   ne the function as a bellman
equation [13], which has the following recursive form:
q  (st, at) = est+1 [rt+1 +   q  (st+1,   (st+1))].

(5)

this means that q   can be improved by id64, i.e.,
we can use the current values of our estimate of q   to improve
our estimate. this is the foundation of id24 [159] and
the state-action-reward-state-action (sarsa) algorithm [112]:

q  (st, at)     q  (st, at) +     ,

(6)
where    is the learning rate and    = y    q  (st, at) the tem-
poral difference (td) error; here, y is a target as in a standard
regression problem. sarsa, an on-policy learning algorithm,
is used to improve the estimate of q   by using transitions
generated by the behavioural policy (the policy derived from

q  ), which results in setting y = rt +   q  (st+1, at+1). q-
learning is off-policy, as q   is instead updated by transitions
that were not necessarily generated by the derived policy.
instead, id24 uses y = rt +    maxa q  (st+1, a), which
directly approximates q   .
to    nd q    from an arbitrary q  , we use generalised
policy iteration, where policy iteration consists of policy eval-
uation and policy improvement. policy evaluation improves
the estimate of the value function, which can be achieved
by minimising td errors from trajectories experienced by
following the policy. as the estimate improves, the policy can
naturally be improved by choosing actions greedily based on
the updated value function. instead of performing these steps
separately to convergence (as in policy iteration), generalised
policy iteration allows for interleaving the steps, such that
progress can be made more rapidly.
b. sampling

instead of id64 value functions using dynamic
programming methods, monte carlo methods estimate the
expected return (2) from a state by averaging the return from
multiple rollouts of a policy. because of this, pure monte carlo
methods can also be applied in non-markovian environments.
on the other hand, they can only be used in episodic mdps,
as a rollout has to terminate for the return to be calculated.
it is possible to get the best of both methods by combining
td learning and monte carlo policy evaluation, as in done in
the td(  ) algorithm [135]. similarly to the discount factor,
the    in td(  ) is used to interpolate between monte carlo
evaluation and id64. as demonstrated in figure 3,
this results in an entire spectrum of rl methods based around
the amount of sampling utilised.

it

another major value-function based method relies on learn-
ing the advantage function a  (s, a) [6, 43]. unlike producing
absolute state-action values, as with q  , a   instead represents
relative state-action values. learning relative values is akin
to removing a baseline or average level of a signal; more
intuitively,
is easier to learn that one action has better
consequences than another, than it is to learn the actual return
from taking the action. a   represents a relative advantage
of actions through the simple relationship a   = q       v   ,
and is also closely related to the baseline method of variance
reduction within gradient-based policy search methods [164].
the idea of advantage updates has been utilised in many recent
drl algorithms [157, 40, 85, 123].
c. policy search

policy search methods do not need to maintain a value
function model, but directly search for an optimal policy
     . typically, a parameterised policy      is chosen, whose
parameters are updated to maximise the expected return e[r|  ]
using either gradient-based or gradient-free optimisation [26].
neural networks that encode policies have been successfully
trained using both gradient-free [37, 23, 64] and gradient-
based [164, 163, 46, 79, 122, 123, 74] methods. gradient-free
optimisation can effectively cover low-dimensional parameter
spaces, but despite some successes in applying them to large
networks [64], gradient-based training remains the method of
choice for most drl algorithms, being more sample-ef   cient

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

5

fig. 3. two dimensions of rl algorithms, based on the backups used to learn
or construct a policy. at the extremes of these dimensions are (a) dynamic
programming, (b) exhaustive search, (c) one-step td learning and (d) pure
monte carlo approaches. id64 extends from (c) 1-step td learning
to n-step td learning methods [135], with (d) pure monte carlo approaches
not relying on id64 at all. another possible dimension of variation
is choosing to (c, d) sample actions versus (a, b) taking the expectation over
all choices. recreated from [135].

when policies possess a large number of parameters.

when constructing the policy directly, it is common to
output parameters for a id203 distribution; for continuous
actions, this could be the mean and standard deviations of
gaussian distributions, whilst for discrete actions this could
be the individual probabilities of a multinomial distribution.
the result is a stochastic policy from which we can directly
sample actions. with gradient-free methods,    nding better
policies requires a heuristic search across a prede   ned class
of models. methods such as evolution strategies essentially
perform hill-climbing in a subspace of policies [116], whilst
more complex methods, such as compressed network search,
impose additional inductive biases [64]. perhaps the greatest
advantage of gradient-free policy search is that they can also
optimise non-differentiable policies.

policy gradients: gradients can provide a strong learning
signal as to how to improve a parameterised policy. however,
to compute the expected return (1) we need to average over
plausible trajectories induced by the current policy parameter-
isation. this averaging requires either deterministic approxi-
mations (e.g., linearisation) or stochastic approximations via
sampling [26]. deterministic approximations can only be ap-
plied in a model-based setting where a model of the underlying
transition dynamics is available. in the more common model-
free rl setting, a monte carlo estimate of the expected return
is determined. for gradient-based learning, this monte carlo
approximation poses a challenge since gradients cannot pass
through these samples of a stochastic function. therefore, we
turn to an estimator of the gradient, known in rl as the rein-
force rule [164], elsewhere known as the score function [34]
or likelihood-ratio estimator [36]. the latter name is telling as
using the estimator is similar to the practice of optimising

fig. 4. actor-critic set-up. the actor (policy) receives a state from the
environment and chooses an action to perform. at the same time, the critic
(value function) receives the state and reward resulting from the previous
interaction. the critic uses the td error calculated from this information to
update itself and the actor. recreated from [135].

the log-likelihood in supervised learning. intuitively, gradient
ascent using the estimator increases the log id203 of the
sampled action, weighted by the return. more formally, the
reinforce rule can be used to compute the gradient of an
expectation over a function f of a random variable x with
respect to parameters   :

     ex [f (x;   )] = ex [f (x;   )      log p(x)].

(7)

as this computation relies on the empirical return of a
the resulting gradients possess a high variance.
trajectory,
by introducing unbiased estimates that are less noisy it is
possible to reduce the variance. the general methodology
for performing this is to subtract a baseline, which means
weighting updates by an advantage rather than the pure return.
the simplest baseline is the average return taken over several
episodes [164], but many more options are available [123].

actor-critic methods: it

is possible to combine value
functions with an explicit representation of the policy, resulting
in actor-critic methods, as shown in figure 4. the    actor   
(policy) learns by using feedback from the    critic    (value
function). in doing so,
these methods trade off variance
reduction of policy gradients with bias introduction from value
function methods [63, 123].

actor-critic methods use the value function as a baseline
for policy gradients, such that the only fundamental difference
between actor-critic methods and other baseline methods are
that actor-critic methods utilise a learned value function. for
this reason, we will later discuss actor-critic methods as a
subset of id189.
d. planning and learning

given a model of the environment, it is possible to use
id145 over all possible actions (figure 3

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

6

(a)), sample trajectories for heuristic search (as was done by
alphago [128]), or even perform an exhaustive search (figure
3 (b)). sutton and barto [135] de   ne planning as any method
which utilises a model to produce or improve a policy. this
includes distribution models, which include t and r, and
sample models, from which only samples of transitions can
be drawn.

in rl, we focus on learning without access to the underly-
ing model of the environment. however, interactions with the
environment could be used to learn value functions, policies,
and also a model. model-free rl methods learn directly
from interactions with the environment, but model-based rl
methods can simulate transitions using the learned model,
resulting in increased sample ef   ciency. this is particularly
important in domains where each interaction with the environ-
ment is expensive. however, learning a model introduces extra
complexities, and there is always the danger of suffering from
model errors, which in turn affects the learned policy; a com-
mon but partial solution in this latter scenario is to use model
predictive control, where planning is repeated after small
sequences of actions in the real environment [16]. although
deep neural networks can potentially produce very complex
and rich models [95, 132, 32], sometimes simpler, more data-
ef   cient methods are preferable [40]. these considerations
also play a role in actor-critic methods with learned value
functions [63, 123].
e. the rise of drl

many of the successes in drl have been based on scaling
up prior work in rl to high-dimensional problems. this is
due to the learning of low-dimensional feature representations
and the powerful function approximation properties of neural
networks. by means of representation learning, drl can deal
ef   ciently with the curse of dimensionality, unlike tabular and
traditional non-parametric methods [15]. for instance, convo-
lutional neural networks (id98s) can be used as components
of rl agents, allowing them to learn directly from raw, high-
dimensional visual inputs. in general, drl is based on training
deep neural networks to approximate the optimal policy      ,
and/or the optimal value functions v    , q    and a   .

although there have been drl successes with gradient-
free methods [37, 23, 64], the vast majority of current works
rely on gradients and hence the id26 algorithm
[162, 111]. the primary motivation is that when available,
gradients provide a strong learning signal. in reality, these
gradients are estimated based on approximations,
through
sampling or otherwise, and as such we have to craft algorithms
with useful inductive biases in order for them to be tractable.
the other bene   t of id26 is to view the op-
timisation of the expected return as the optimisation of a
stochastic function [121, 46]. this function can comprise of
several parts   models, policies and value functions   which
can be combined in various ways. the individual parts, such as
value functions, may not directly optimise the expected return,
but can instead embody useful
the rl
domain. for example, using a differentiable model and policy,
it is possible to forward propagate and backpropagate through
entire rollouts; on the other hand, innacuracies can accumulate

information about

over long time steps, and it may be be pertinent to instead use
a value function to summarise the statistics of the rollouts [46].
we have previously mentioned that representation learning and
function approximation are key to the success of drl, but it
is also true to say that the    eld of deep learning has inspired
new ways of thinking about rl.

following our review of rl, we will now partition the
next part of the survey into value function and policy search
methods in drl, starting with the well-known deep q-
network (id25) [84]. in these sections, we will focus on state-
of-the-art techniques, as well as the historical works they are
built upon. the focus of the state-of-the-art techniques will be
on those for which the state space is conveyed through visual
inputs, e.g., images and video. to conclude, we will examine
ongoing research areas and open challenges.

iv. value functions

the well-known function approximation properties of neural
networks led naturally to the use of deep learning to regress
functions for use in rl agents. indeed, one of the earliest
success stories in rl is td-gammon, a neural network that
reached expert-level performance in backgammon in the early
90s [141]. using td methods, the network took in the state of
the board to predict the id203 of black or white winning.
although this simple idea has been echoed in later work
[128], progress in rl research has favoured the explicit use
of value functions, which can capture the structure underlying
the environment. from early value function methods in drl,
which took simple states as input [109], current methods
are now able to tackle visually and conceptually complex
environments [84, 122, 85, 96, 167].
a. function approximation and the id25

we begin our survey of value-function-based drl al-
gorithms with the id25 [84], pictured in figure 5, which
achieved scores across a wide range of classic atari 2600 video
games [10] that were comparable to that of a professional
video games tester. the inputs to the id25 are four greyscale
frames of the game, concatenated over time, which are initially
processed by several convolutional layers in order to extract
spatiotemporal features, such as the movement of the ball
in    pong    or    breakout.    the    nal feature map from the
convolutional layers is processed by several fully connected
layers, which more implicitly encode the effects of actions.
this contrasts with more traditional controllers that use    xed
preprocessing steps, which are therefore unable to adapt their
processing of the state in response to the learning signal.

a forerunner of

the id25   neural    tted q iteration
(nfq)   involved training a neural network to return the q-
value given a state-action pair [109]. nfq was later extended
to train a network to drive a slot car using raw visual inputs
from a camera over the race track, by combining a deep
autoencoder to reduce the dimensionality of the inputs with
a separate branch to predict q-values [69]. although the pre-
vious network could have been trained for both reconstruction
and rl tasks simultaneously, it was both more reliable and
computationally ef   cient to train the two parts of the network
sequentially.

the id25 [84] is closely related to the model proposed

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

7

fig. 5. the deep q-network [84]. the network takes the state   a stack of greyscale frames from the video game   and processes it with convolutional and
fully connected layers, with relu nonlinearities in between each layer. at the    nal layer, the network outputs a discrete action, which corresponds to one of
the possible control inputs for the game. given the current state and chosen action, the game returns a new score. the id25 uses the reward   the difference
between the new score and the previous one   to learn from its decision. more precisely, the reward is used to update its estimate of q, and the error between
its previous estimate and its new estimate is backpropagated through the network.

by lange et al. [69], but was the    rst rl algorithm that
was demonstrated to work directly from raw visual inputs
and on a wide variety of environments. it was designed such
that the    nal fully connected layer outputs q  (s,  ) for all
action values in a discrete set of actions   in this case, the
various directions of the joystick and the    re button. this not
only enables the best action, argmaxa q  (s, a), to be chosen
after a single forward pass of the network, but also allows the
network to more easily encode action-independent knowledge
in the lower, convolutional layers. with merely the goal of
maximising its score on a video game, the id25 learns to
extract salient visual features, jointly encoding objects, their
movements, and, most importantly, their interactions. using
techniques originally developed for explaining the behaviour
of id98s in object recognition tasks, we can also inspect what
parts of its view the agent considers important (see figure 6).

fig. 6. saliency map of a trained id25 [84] playing    space invaders    [10].
by backpropagating the training signal to the image space, it is possible to
see what a neural-network-based agent is attending to. in this frame, the
most salient points   shown with the red overlay   are the laser that the agent
recently    red, and also the enemy that it anticipates hitting in a few time
steps.

the true underlying state of the game is contained within
128 bytes of atari 2600 ram. however,
the id25 was
designed to directly learn from visual inputs (210    160pixel
8-bit rgb images), which it
is
impractical to represent q  (s, a) exactly as a lookup table:
when combined with 18 possible actions, we obtain a q-
table of size |s|    |a| = 18    2563  210  160. even if it were
feasible to create such a table, it would be sparsely populated,
and information gained from one state-action pair cannot be
propagated to other state-action pairs. the strength of the id25

takes as the state s. it

lies in its ability to compactly represent both high-dimensional
observations and the q-function using deep neural networks.
without this ability, tackling the discrete atari domain from
raw visual inputs would be impractical.

the id25 addressed the fundamental instability problem
of using function approximation in rl [145] by the use of
two techniques: experience replay [80] and target networks.
experience replay memory stores transitions of the form
(st, at, st+1, rt+1) in a cyclic buffer, enabling the rl agent
to sample from and train on previously observed data of   ine.
not only does this massively reduce the amount of interactions
needed with the environment, but batches of experience can
be sampled, reducing the variance of learning updates. fur-
thermore, by sampling uniformly from a large memory, the
temporal correlations that can adversely affect rl algorithms
are broken. finally, from a practical perspective, batches
of data can be ef   ciently processed in parallel by modern
hardware, increasing throughput. whilst the original id25
algorithm used uniform sampling [84], later work showed
that prioritising samples based on td errors is more effective
for learning [118]. we note that although experience replay
is typically thought of as a model-free technique, it could
actually be considered a simple model [150].

the second stabilising method, introduced by mnih et al.
[84], is the use of a target network that initially contains the
weights of the network enacting the policy, but is kept frozen
for a large period of time. rather than having to calculate the
td error based on its own rapidly    uctuating estimates of the
q-values, the policy network uses the    xed target network.
during training, the weights of the target network are updated
to match the policy network after a    xed number of steps.
both experience replay and target networks have gone on to
be used in subsequent drl works [40, 79, 158, 89].
b. q-function modi   cations

considering that one of the key components of the id25 is
a function approximator for the q-function, it can bene   t from
fundamental advances in rl. van hasselt [148] showed that
the single estimator used in the id24 update rule over-
estimates the expected return due to the use of the maximum
action value as an approximation of the maximum expected
action value. double-id24 provides a better estimate
through the use of a double estimator [148]. whilst double-
id24 requires an additional function to be learned, later
work proposed using the already available target network from
the id25 algorithm, resulting in signi   cantly better results
with only a small change in the update step [149]. a more

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

8

radical proposal by bellemare et al. [12] was to actually learn
the full value distribution, rather than just the expectation; this
provides additional information, such as whether the potential
rewards come from a skewed or multimodal distribution. al-
though the resulting algorithm   based on learning categorical
distributions   was used to construct the categorical id25, the
bene   ts can potentially be applied to any rl algorithm that
utilises learned value functions.
yet another way to adjust

the id25 architecture is to
decompose the q-function into meaningful functions, such
as constructing q   by adding together separate layers that
compute the state-value function v    and advantage function
a   [157]. rather than having to come up with accurate q-
values for all actions, the duelling id25 [157] bene   ts from a
single baseline for the state in the form of v   , and easier-to-
learn relative values in the form of a  . the combination of the
duelling id25 with prioritised experience replay [118] is one
of the state-of-the-art techniques in discrete action settings.
further insight into the properties of a   by gu et al. [40]
led them to modify the id25 with a convex advantage layer
that extended the algorithm to work over sets of continuous
actions, creating the normalised advantage function (naf)
algorithm. bene   ting from experience replay, target networks
and advantage updates, naf is one of several state-of-the-art
techniques in continuous control problems [40].

some rl domains, such as recommender systems, have
very large discrete action spaces, and hence may be dif   cult to
directly deal with. dulac-arnold et al. [30] proposed learning
   action embeddings    over the large set of original actions,
and then using k-nearest neighbors to produce    proto-actions   
which can be used with traditional rl methods. the idea of
using representation learning to create distributed embeddings
is a particular strength of drl, and has been successfully
utilised for other purposes [161, 100]. another related scenario
in rl is when many actions need to be made simultaneously,
such as specifying the torques in a many-jointed robot, which
results in the action space growing exponentially. a naive but
reasonable approach is to factorise the policy, treating each
action independently [115]. an alternative is to construct an
autoregressive policy, where each action in a single timestep
is predicted conditionally on the state and previously chosen
actions from the same timestep [106, 5, 168]. metz et al.
[81] used this idea in order to construct the sequential id25,
allowing them to discretise a large action space and outperform
naf   which is limited by its quadratic advantage function   
in continous control problems. in a broader context, rather
than dealing directly with primitive actions directly, one may
choose to invoke    subpolicies    from higher-level policies
[136]; this concept, known as hierarchical reinforcement learn-
ing (hrl), will be discussed later.

v. policy search

policy search methods aim to directly    nd policies by means
of gradient-free or gradient-based methods. prior to the current
surge of interest in drl, several successful methods in drl
eschewed the commonly used id26 algorithm in
favour of evolutionary algorithms [37, 23, 64], which are
gradient-free policy search algorithms. evolutionary methods

rely on evaluating the performance of a population of agents.
hence, they are expensive for large populations or agents with
many parameters. however, as black-box optimisation meth-
ods they can be used to optimise arbitrary, non-differentiable
models and naturally allow for more exploration in parameter
space. in combination with a compressed representation of
neural network weights, evolutionary algorithms can even be
used to train large networks; such a technique resulted in the
   rst deep neural network to learn an rl task, straight from
high-dimensional visual inputs [64]. recent work has reignited
interest in evolutionary methods for rl as they can potentially
be distributed at larger scales than techniques that rely on
gradients [116].
a. id26 through stochastic functions

the workhorse of drl, however, remains id26
[162, 111]. the previously discussed reinforce rule [164]
allows neural networks to learn stochastic policies in a task-
dependent manner, such as deciding where to look in an
image to track [120], classify [83] or caption objects [166].
in these cases, the stochastic variable would determine the
coordinates of a small crop of the image, and hence reduce
the amount of computation needed. this usage of rl to make
discrete, stochastic decisions over inputs is known in the deep
learning literature as hard attention, and is one of the more
compelling uses of basic policy search methods in recent years,
having many applications outside of traditional rl domains.
more generally, the ability to backpropagate through stochastic
functions, using techniques such as reinforce [164] or the
   reparameterisation trick    [61, 108], allows neural networks
to be treated as stochastic computation graphs that can be
optimised over [121], which is a key concept in algorithms
such as stochastic value gradients (svgs) [46].
b. compounding errors

searching directly for a policy represented by a neural
network with very many parameters can be dif   cult and can
suffer from severe local minima. one way around this is to
use guided policy search (gps), which takes a few sequences
of actions from another controller (which could be constructed
using a separate method, such as optimal control). gps learns
from them by using supervised learning in combination with
importance sampling, which corrects for off-policy samples
[73]. this approach effectively biases the search towards a
good (local) optimum. gps works in a loop, by optimising
policies to match sampled trajectories, and optimising tra-
jectory distributions to match the policy and minimise costs.
initially, gps was used to train neural networks on simulated
continuous rl problems [72], but was later utilised to train
a policy for a real robot based on visual inputs [74]. this
research by levine et al. [74] showed that it was possible
to train visuomotor policies for a robot    end-to-end   , straight
from the rgb pixels of the camera to motor torques, and,
hence, is one of the seminal works in drl.

a more commonly used method is to use a trust region, in
which optimisation steps are restricted to lie within a region
where the approximation of the true cost function still holds.
by preventing updated policies from deviating too wildly
from previous policies, the chance of a catastrophically bad

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

9

update is lessened, and many algorithms that use trust regions
guarantee or practically result in monotonic improvement in
policy performance. the idea of constraining each policy
gradient update, as measured by the kullback-leibler (kl)
divergence between the current and proposed policy, has a long
history in rl [57, 4, 59, 103]. one of the newer algorithms in
this line of work, trust region policy optimisation (trpo),
has been shown to be relatively robust and applicable to
domains with high-dimensional inputs [122]. to achieve this,
trpo optimises a surrogate objective function   speci   cally,
it optimises an (importance sampled) advantage estimate, con-
strained using a quadratic approximation of the kl divergence.
whilst trpo can be used as a pure policy gradient method
with a simple baseline, later work by schulman et al. [123]
introduced generalised advantage estimation (gae), which
proposed several, more advanced variance reduction baselines.
the combination of trpo and gae remains one of the state-
of-the-art rl techniques in continuous control. however, the
constrained optimisation of trpo requires calculating second-
order gradients,
the
newer proximal policy optimisation (ppo) algorithm performs
unconstrained optimisation, requiring only    rst-order gradient
information [1, 47, 125]. the two main variants include an
adaptive penalty on the kl divergence, and a heuristic clipped
objective which is independent of the kl divergence [125].
being less expensive whilst retaining the performance of
trpo means that ppo (with or without gae) is gaining
popularity for a range of rl tasks [47, 125].
c. actor-critic methods

limiting its applicability. in contrast,

instead of utilising the average of several monte carlo
returns as the baseline for id189, actor-
critic approaches have grown in popularity as an effective
means of combining the bene   ts of policy search methods
with learned value functions, which are able to learn from full
returns and/or td errors. they can bene   t from improvements
in both id189, such as gae [123], and value
function methods, such as target networks [84]. in the last few
years, drl actor-critic methods have been scaled up from
learning simulated physics tasks [46, 79] to real robotic visual
navigation tasks [167], directly from image pixels.

one recent development in the context of actor-critic algo-
rithms are deterministic policy gradients (dpgs) [127], which
extend the standard policy gradient theorems for stochastic
policies [164] to deterministic policies. one of the major
advantages of dpgs is that, whilst stochastic policy gradi-
ents integrate over both state and action spaces, dpgs only
integrate over the state space, requiring fewer samples in
problems with large action spaces. in the initial work on
dpgs, silver et al. [127] introduced and demonstrated an
off-policy actor-critic algorithm that vastly improved upon
a stochastic policy gradient equivalent in high-dimensional
continuous control problems. later work introduced deep dpg
(ddpg), which utilised neural networks to operate on high-
dimensional, visual state spaces [79]. in the same vein as
dpgs, heess et al. [46] devised a method for calculating
gradients to optimise stochastic policies, by    reparameterising   
[61, 108] the stochasticity away from the network, thereby

allowing standard gradients to be used (instead of the high-
variance reinforce estimator [164]). the resulting svg
methods are    exible, and can be used both with (svg(0) and
svg(1)) and without (svg(   )) value function critics, and
with (svg(   ) and svg(1)) and without (svg(0)) models.
later work proceeded to integrate dpgs and svgs with
id56s, allowing them to solve continuous control problems
in pomdps, learning directly from pixels [45].

value functions introduce a broadly applicable bene   t in
actor-critic methods   the ability to use off-policy data. on-
policy methods can be more stable, whilst off-policy methods
can be more data ef   cient, and hence there have been several
attempts to merge the two [158, 94, 41, 39, 42]. earlier
work has either utilised a mix of on-policy and off-policy
gradient updates [158, 94, 39], or used the off-policy data
to train a value function in order to reduce the variance of
on-policy gradient updates [41]. the more recent work by
gu et al. [42] uni   ed these methods under interpolated policy
gradients (ipgs), resulting in one of the newest state-of-the-
art continuous drl algorithms, and also providing insights for
future research in this area. together, the ideas behind ipgs
and svgs (of which dpgs can be considered a special case)
form algorithmic approaches for improving learning ef   ciency
in drl.

an orthogonal approach to speeding up learning is to
exploit parallel computation. in particular, methods for training
networks through asynchronous gradient updates have been
developed for use on both single machines [107] and dis-
tributed systems [25]. by keeping a canonical set of parameters
that are read by and updated in an asynchronous fashion
by multiple copies of a single network, computation can be
ef   ciently distributed over both processing cores in a single
cpu, and across cpus in a cluster of machines. using a
distributed system, nair et al. [91] developed a framework
for training multiple id25s in parallel, achieving both better
performance and a reduction in training time. however, the
simpler asynchronous advantage actor-critic (a3c) algorithm
[85], developed for both single and distributed machine set-
tings, has become one of the most popular drl techniques
in recent times. a3c combines advantage updates with the
actor-critic formulation, and relies on asynchronously updated
policy and value function networks trained in parallel over
several processing threads. the use of multiple agents, situated
in their own, independent environments, not only stabilises
improvements in the parameters, but conveys an additional
bene   t in allowing for more exploration to occur. a3c has
been used as a standard starting point in many subsequent
works, including the work of zhu et al. [167], who applied it
to robotic navigation in the real world through visual inputs.
for simplicity, the underlying algorithm may be used with
just one agent, termed advantage actor-critic (a2c) [156].
alternatively, segments from the trajectories of multiple agents
can be collected and processed together in a batch, with
batch processing more ef   ciently enabled by gpus;
this
synchronous version also goes by the name of a2c [125].

there have been several major advancements on the original
a3c algorithm that re   ect various motivations in the    eld of
drl. the    rst is actor-critic with experience replay [158, 39],

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

10

which adds retrace(  ) off-policy bias correction [88] to a
q-value-based a3c, allowing it to use experience replay in
order to improve sample complexity. others have attempted to
bridge the gap between value and policy-based rl, utilising
theoretical advancements to improve upon the original a3c
[89, 94, 124]. finally, there is a growing trend towards ex-
ploiting auxiliary tasks to improve the representations learned
by drl agents, and, hence, improve both the learning speed
and    nal performance of these agents [77, 54, 82].

vi. current research and challenges

to conclude, we will highlight some current areas of re-
search in drl, and the challenges that still remain. previously,
we have focused mainly on model-free methods, but we will
now examine a few model-based drl algorithms in more
detail. model-based rl algorithms play an important role in
making rl data-ef   cient and in trading off exploration and
exploitation. after tackling exploration strategies, we shall
then address hrl, which imposes an inductive bias on the
   nal policy by explicitly factorising it into several levels. when
available, trajectories from other controllers can be used to
bootstrap the learning process, leading us to imitation learning
and inverse rl (irl). for the    nal topic speci   c to rl, we
will look at multi-agent systems, which have their own special
considerations. we then bring to attention two broader areas   
the use of id56s, and id21   in the context of
drl. we then examine the issue of evaluating rl, and current
benchmarks for drl.
a. model-based rl

the key idea behind model-based rl is to learn a tran-
sition model that allows for simulation of the environment
without interacting with the environment directly. model-based
rl does not assume speci   c prior knowledge. however, in
practice, we can incorporate prior knowledge (e.g., physics-
based models [58]) to speed up learning. model
learning
plays an important role in reducing the amount of required
interactions with the (real) environment, which may be limited
in practice. for example, it is unrealistic to perform millions of
experiments with a robot in a reasonable amount of time and
without signi   cant hardware wear and tear. there are various
approaches to learn predictive models of dynamical systems
using pixel information. based on the deep dynamical model
[154], where high-dimensional observations are embedded
into a lower-dimensional space using autoencoders, several
model-based drl algorithms have been proposed for learning
models and policies from pixel information [95, 160, 155]. if a
suf   ciently accurate model of the environment can be learned,
then even simple controllers can be used to control a robot
directly from camera images [32]. learned models can also
be used to guide exploration purely based on simulation of the
environment, with deep models allowing these techniques to
be scaled up to high-dimensional visual domains [132].

a compelling insight on the bene   ts of neural-network-
based models is that they can overcome some of the problems
incurred by planning with imperfect models; in effect, by
embedding the activations and predictions (outputs) of these
models into a vector, a drl agent can not only obtain more
information than just the    nal result of any model rollouts, but

it can also learn to downplay this information if it believes
that the model is inaccurate [161]. this can be more ef   cient,
though less principled, than bayesian methods for propagating
uncertainty [52]. another way to make use of the    exiblity
of neural-network-based models is to let them decide when to
plan, that is, given a    nite amount of computation, whether it is
worth modelling one long trajectory, several short trajectories,
anything in-between, or simply to take an action in the real
environment [100].

although deep neural networks can make reasonable pre-
dictions in simulated environments over hundreds of timesteps
[21], they typically require many samples to tune the large
amount of parameters they contain. training these models
often requires more samples (interaction with the environment)
than simpler models. for this reason, gu et al. [40] train
locally linear models for use with the naf algorithm   
the continuous equivalent of the id25 [84]   to improve the
algorithm   s sample complexity in the robotic domain where
samples are expensive. in order to spur the adoption of deep
models in model-based drl, it is necessary to    nd strategies
that can be used in order to improve their data ef   ciency [90].
a less common but potentially useful paradigm exists
between model-free and model-based methods   the successor
representation (sr) [24]. rather than picking actions directly
or performing planning with models, learning t is replaced
with learning expected (discounted) future occupancies (srs),
which can be linearly combined with r in order to calculate
the optimal action; this decomposition makes srs more robust
than model-free methods when the reward structure changes
(but still fallible when t changes). work extending srs to
deep neural networks has demonstrated its usefulness in multi-
task settings, whilst within a complex visual environment [66].
b. exploration vs. exploitation

one of the greatest dif   culties in rl is the fundamental
dilemma of exploration versus exploitation: when should the
agent
try out (perceived) non-optimal actions in order to
explore the environment (and potentially improve the model),
and when should it exploit the optimal action in order to make
useful progress? off-policy algorithms, such as the id25 [84],
typically use the simple  -greedy exploration policy, which
chooses a random action with id203       [0, 1], and the
optimal action otherwise. by decreasing   over time, the agent
progresses towards exploitation. although adding independent
noise for exploration is usable in continuous control problems,
more sophisticated strategies inject noise that is correlated
over time (e.g., from stochastic processes) in order to better
preserve momentum [79].

the observation that temporal correlation is important led
osband et al. [97] to propose the bootstrapped id25, which
maintains several q-value    heads    that learn different values
through a combination of different weight initialisations and
bootstrapped sampling from experience replay memory. at
the beginning of each training episode, a different head is
chosen, leading to temporally-extended exploration. usunier
et al. [147] later proposed a similar method that performed
exploration in policy space by adding noise to a single output
head, using zero-order gradient estimates to allow backpropa-

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

11

gation through the policy.

one of the main principled exploration strategies is the
upper con   dence bound (ucb) algorithm, based on the prin-
ciple of    optimism in the face of uncertainty    [67]. the idea
behind ucb is to pick actions that maximise e[r] +     [r],
where   [r]
is the standard deviation of the return and
   > 0. ucb therefore encourages exploration in regions with
high uncertainty and moderate expected return. whilst easily
achievable in small tabular cases, the use of powerful density
models [11], or conversely, hashing [139], has allowed this
algorithm to scale to high-dimensional visual domains with
drl. ucb is only one technique for trading off exploration
and exploitation in the context of bayesian optimisation [126];
future work in drl may bene   t from investigating other
successful techniques that are used in bayesian optimisation.
ucb can also be considered one way of implementing
intrinsic motivation, which is a general concept that advocates
decreasing uncertainty/making progress in learning about the
environment [119]. there have been several drl algorithms
that
intrinsic motivation via minimising
model prediction error [132, 101] or maximising information
gain [86, 52].
c. hierarchical rl

try to implement

in the same way that deep learning relies on hierarchies
of features, hrl relies on hierarchies of policies. early work
in this area introduced options, in which, apart from primi-
tive actions (single-timestep actions), policies could also run
other policies (multi-timestep    actions   ) [136]. this approach
allows top-level policies to focus on higher-level goals, whilst
subpolicies are responsible for    ne control. several works in
drl have attempted hrl by using one top-level policy that
chooses between subpolicies, where the division of states or
goals in to subpolicies is achieved either manually [2, 143, 65]
or automatically [3, 151, 152]. one way to help construct
subpolicies is to focus on discovering and reaching goals,
which are speci   c states in the environment; they may often be
locations, which an agent should navigate to. whether utilised
with hrl or not, the discovery and generalisation of goals is
also an important area of ongoing research [117, 66, 152].
d. imitation learning and inverse rl

one may ask why, if given a sequence of    optimal    actions
from expert demonstrations, it is not possible to use supervised
learning in a straightforward manner   a case of    learning
from demonstration   . this is indeed possible, and is known
as behavioural cloning in traditional rl literature. taking
advantage of the stronger signals available in supervised learn-
ing problems, behavioural cloning enjoyed success in earlier
neural network research, with the most notable success being
alvinn, one of the earliest id101 [104]. however,
behavioural cloning cannot adapt to new situations, and small
deviations from the demonstration during the execution of the
learned policy can compound and lead to scenarios where the
policy is unable to recover. a more generalisable solution is
to use provided trajectories to guide the learning of suitable
state-action pairs, but    ne-tune the agent using rl [49].
alternatively, if the expert is still available to query during
training, the agent can use active learning to gather extra data

when it is unsure, allowing it to learn from states away from
the optimal trajectories [110]. this has been applied to a deep
learning setting, where a id98 trained in a visual navigation
task with active learning signi   cantly improved upon a pure
imitation learning baseline [53].

the goal of irl is to estimate an unknown reward function
from observed trajectories that characterise a desired solution
[92]; irl can be used in combination with rl to improve
upon demonstrated behaviour. using the power of deep neural
networks, it is now possible to learn complex, nonlinear reward
functions for irl [165]. ho and ermon [51] showed that poli-
cies are uniquely characterised by their occupancies (visited
state and action distributions) allowing irl to be reduced to
the problem of measure matching. with this insight, they were
able to use generative adversarial training [38] to facilitate
reward function learning in a more    exible manner, resulting in
the generative adversarial imitation learning (gail) algorithm.
gail was later extended to allow irl to be applied even when
receiving expert trajectories from a different visual viewpoint
to that of the rl agent [131]. in complementary work, baram
et al. [7] exploit gradient information that was not used in
gail to learn models within the irl process.
e. multi-agent rl

usually, rl considers a single learning agent in a sta-
tionary environment. in contrast, multi-agent rl (marl)
considers multiple agents learning through rl, and often the
non-stationarity introduced by other agents changing their
behaviours as they learn [18]. in drl, the focus has been
on enabling (differentiable) communication between agents,
which allows them to co-operate. several approaches have
been proposed for this purpose, including passing messages
to agents sequentially [33], using a bidirectional channel
(providing ordering with less signal loss) [102], and an all-
to-all channel [134]. the addition of communication channels
is a natural strategy to apply to marl in complex scenarios
and does not preclude the usual practice of modelling co-
operative or competing agents as applied elsewhere in the
marl literature [18]. other drl works of note in marl
investigate the effects of learning and sequential decision
making in game theory [48, 71].
f. memory and attention

as one of the earliest works in drl the id25 spawned
many extensions. one of the    rst extensions was converting
the id25 into an id56, which allows the network to better
deal with pomdps by integrating information over long time
periods. like recursive    lters, recurrent connections provide an
ef   cient means of acting conditionally on temporally distant
prior observations. by using recurrent connections between
its hidden units, the deep recurrent q-network (drqn) in-
troduced by hausknecht and stone [44] was able to suc-
cessfully infer the velocity of the ball in the game    pong,   
even when frames of the game were randomly blanked out.
further improvements were gained by introducing attention   
a technique where additional connections are added from the
recurrent units to lower layers   to the drqn, resulting in the
deep attention recurrent q-network (darqn) [130]. attention
gives a network the ability to choose which part of its next

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

12

input to focus on, and allowed the darqn to beat both
the id25 and drqn on games, which require longer-term
planning. however, the id25 outperformed the drqn and
darqn on games requiring quick reactions, where q-values
can    uctuate more rapidly.

taking recurrent processing further, it is possible to add a
differentiable memory to the id25, which allows it to more
   exibly process information in its    working memory    [96]. in
traditional id56s, recurrent units are responsible for both per-
forming calculations and storing information. differentiable
memories add large matrices that are purely used for storing
information, and can be accessed using differentiable read
and write operations, analagously to computer memory. with
their key-value-based memory q-network (mqn), oh et al.
[96] constructed an agent that could solve a simple maze
built in minecraft, where the correct goal in each episode
was indicated by a coloured block shown near the start of
the maze. the mqn, and especially its more sophisticated
variants, signi   cantly outperformed both id25 and drqn
baselines, highlighting the importance of using decoupled
memory storage. more recent work, where the memory was
given a 2d structure in order to resemble a spatial map, hints
at future research where more specialised memory structures
will be developed to address speci   c problems, such as 2d or
3d navigation [98]. alternatively, differentiable memories can
be used as approximate hash tables, allowing drl algorithms
to store and retrieve successful experiences to facilitate rapid
learning [105].

note that id56s are not restricted to value-function-based
methods but have also been successfully applied to policy
search [163] and actor-critic methods [45, 85].
g. id21

even though drl algorithms can process high-dimensional
inputs, it is rarely feasible to train rl agents directly on
visual inputs in the real world, due to the large number of
samples required. to speed up learning in drl, it is possible
to exploit previously acquired knowledge from related tasks,
which comes in several guises: id21, multitask
learning [20] and curriculum learning [14] to name a few.
there is much interest in transferring learning from one task to
another, particularly from training in physics simulators with
visual renderers and    ne-tuning the models in the real world.
this can be achieved in a naive fashion, directly using the
same network in both the simulated and real phases [167], or
with more sophisticated training procedures that directly try
to mitigate the problem of neural networks    catastrophically
forgetting    old knowledge by adding extra layers when trans-
ferring domain [114, 115]. other approaches involve directly
learning an alignment between simulated and real visuals
[146], or even between two different camera viewpoints [131].
a different form of transfer can be utilised to help rl in
the form of multitask training [77, 54, 82]. especially with
neural networks, supervised and unsupervised learning tasks
can help train features that can be used by rl agents, making
optimising the rl objective easier to achieve. for example,
the    unsupervised reinforcement and auxiliary learning    a3c-
based agent is additionally trained with    pixel control    (maxi-

mally changing pixel inputs), plus reward prediction and value
function learning from experience replay [54]. meanwhile, the
a3c-based agent of mirowski et al. [82] was additionally
trained to construct a depth map given rgb inputs, which
helps it in its task of learning to navigate a 3d environment.
in an ablation study, mirowski et al. [82] showed the predicting
depth was more useful than receiving depth as an extra input,
lending further support to the idea that gradients induced by
auxiliary tasks can be extremely effective at boosting drl.

id21 can also be used to construct more
data- and parameter-ef   cient policies. in the student-teacher
paradigm in machine learning, one can    rst
train a more
powerful    teacher    model, and then use it to guide the training
of a less powerful    student    model. whilst originally applied
to supervised learning, the neural network knowledge transfer
technique known as distillation [50] has been utilised to both
transfer policies learned by large id25s to smaller id25s, and
transfer policies learned by several id25s trained on separate
games to one single id25 [99, 113]. together, the combination
of multitask and id21 can improve the sample
ef   ciency and robustness of current drl algorithms [140].
these are important topics if we wish to construct agents that
can accomplish a wide range of tasks, since naively training
on multiple rl objectives at once may be infeasible.
h. benchmarks

one of the challenges in any    eld in machine learning is
developing a standardised way to evaluate new techniques.
although much early work focused on simple, custom mdps,
there shortly emerged control problems that could be used as
standard benchmarks for testing new algorithms, such as the
cartpole [8] and mountain car [87] domains.

however, these problems were limited to relatively small
state spaces, and therefore failed to capture the complexities
that would be encountered in most realistic scenarios. ar-
guably the initial driver of drl, the ale provided an interface
to atari 2600 video games, with code to access over 50 games
provided with the initial release [10]. as video games can vary
greatly, but still present interesting and challenging objectives
for humans, they provide an excellent testbed for rl agents.
as the    rst algorithm to successfully play a range of these
games directly from their visuals, the id25 [84] has secured
its place as a milestone in the development of rl algorithms.
this success story has started a trend of using video games
as standardised rl testbeds, with several interesting options
now available. vizdoom provides an interface to the doom
   rst-person shooter [60], and echoing the popularity of e-
sports competitions, vizdoom competitions are now held at
the yearly ieee conference on computational intelligence
in games. facebook   s torchcraft [137] and deepmind   s
starcraft ii learning environment [153] respectively provide
interfaces to the starcraft and starcraft ii real-time strategy
games, presenting challenges in both micromanagement and
long-term planning. in an aim to provide more    exible envi-
ronments, deepmind lab was developed on top of the quake
iii arena    rst-person shooter engine [9], and microsoft   s
project malmo exposed an interface to the minecraft sandbox
game [55]. both environments provide customisable platforms

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

13

for rl agents in 3d environments.

most drl approaches focus on discrete actions, but some
solutions have also been developed for continuous control
problems. many drl papers in continuous control [122, 46,
79, 85, 7, 131] have used the mujoco physics engine to
obtain relatively realistic dynamics for multi-joint continuous
control problems [144], and there has now been some effort
to standardise these problems [28].

to help with standardisation and reproducibility, most of
the aforementioned rl domains and more have been made
available in the openai gym, a library and online service
that allows people to easily interface with and publicly share
the results of rl algorithms on these domains [17].

vii. conclusion: beyond pattern recognition
despite the successes of drl, many problems need to be
addressed before these techniques can be applied to a wide
range of complex real-world problems [68]. recent work with
(non-deep) generative causal models demonstrated superior
generalisation over standard drl algorithms [85, 114] in
some benchmarks [10], achieved by reasoning about causes
and effects in the environment [58]. for example, the schema
networks of kanksy et al. [58] trained on the game    breakout   
immediately adapted to a variant where a small wall was
placed in front of the target blocks, whilst progressive (a3c)
networks [114] failed to match the performance of the schema
networks even after training on the new domain. although
drl has already been combined with ai techniques, such as
search [128] and planning [138], a deeper integration with
other traditional ai approaches promises bene   ts such as
better sample complexity, generalisation and interpretability
[35]. in time, we also hope that our theoretical understanding
of the properties of neural networks (particularly within drl)
will improve, as it currently lags far behind practice.

to conclude, it is worth revisiting the overarching goal
of all of this research: the creation of general-purpose ai
systems that can interact with and learn from the world around
them. interaction with the environment is simultaneously the
advantage and disadvantage of rl. whilst there are many
challenges in seeking to understand our complex and ever-
changing world, rl allows us to choose how we explore
it. in effect, rl endows agents with the ability to perform
experiments to better understand their surroundings, enabling
them to learn even high-level causal relationships. the avail-
ability of high-quality visual renderers and physics engines
now enables us to take steps in this direction, with works that
try to learn intuitive models of physics in visual environments
[27]. challenges remain before this will be possible in the real
world, but steady progress is being made in agents that learn
the fundamental principles of the world through observation
and action. perhaps,
too far away from
ai systems that learn and act in more human-like ways in
increasingly complex environments.

then, we are not

acknowledgments

the authors would like to thank the reviewers and broader
community for their feedback on this survey; in particular,
we would like to thank nicolas heess for clari   cations on
several points. kai arulkumaran would like to acknowledge

phd funding from the department of bioengineering, imperial
college london. this research has been partially funded by a
google faculty research award to marc deisenroth.

references

[1] pieter abbeel and john schulman. deep id23

through policy optimization, 2016. tutorial at nips 2016.

[2] kai arulkumaran, nat dilokthanakul, murray shanahan, and anil an-
thony bharath. classifying options for deep id23.
in ijcai workshop on deep id23: frontiers and
challenges, 2016.

[3] pierre-luc bacon, jean harb, and doina precup. the option-critic

architecture. in aaai, 2017.

[4] j andrew bagnell and jeff schneider. covariant policy search.

in

[5] dzmitry bahdanau, philemon brakel, kelvin xu, anirudh goyal, ryan
lowe, joelle pineau, aaron courville, and yoshua bengio. an actor-
critic algorithm for sequence prediction. in iclr, 2017.

[6] leemon c baird iii. advantage updating. technical report, dtic,

ijcai, 2003.

1993.

[7] nir baram, oron anschel, and shie mannor. model-based adver-
sarial imitation learning. in nips workshop on deep reinforcement
learning, 2016.

[8] andrew g barto, richard s sutton, and charles w anderson. neu-
ronlike adaptive elements that can solve dif   cult learning control
problems. ieee trans. on systems, man, and cybernetics, (5):834   
846, 1983.

[9] charles beattie, joel z leibo, denis teplyashin, tom ward, marcus
wainwright, heinrich k  uttler, andrew lefrancq, simon green, v    ctor
vald  es, amir sadik, et al. deepmind lab. arxiv:1612.03801, 2016.
[10] marc g bellemare, yavar naddaf, joel veness, and michael bowl-
ing. the arcade learning environment: an evaluation platform for
general agents. in ijcai, 2015.

[11] marc g bellemare, sriram srinivasan, georg ostrovski, tom schaul,
david saxton, and r  emi munos. unifying count-based exploration
and intrinsic motivation. in nips, 2016.

[12] marc g bellemare, will dabney, and r  emi munos. a distributional

perspective on id23. in icml, 2017.

[13] richard bellman. on the theory of id145. pnas,

38(8):716   719, 1952.

[14] yoshua bengio, j  er  ome louradour, ronan collobert, and jason we-

ston. curriculum learning. in icml, 2009.

[15] yoshua bengio, aaron courville, and pascal vincent. representation
learning: a review and new perspectives. ieee trans. on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1798   1828, 2013.

[16] dimitri p bertsekas. id145 and suboptimal control:
a survey from adp to mpc. european journal of control, 11(4-5):
310   334, 2005.

[17] greg brockman, vicki cheung, ludwig pettersson, jonas schneider,
john schulman, jie tang, and wojciech zaremba. openai gym.
arxiv:1606.01540, 2016.

[18] lucian busoniu, robert babuska, and bart de schutter. a compre-
hensive survey of multiagent id23. ieee trans. on
systems, man, and cybernetics, 2008.

[19] murray campbell, a joseph hoane, and feng-hsiung hsu. deep blue.

arti   cial intelligence, 134(1-2):57   83, 2002.

[20] rich caruana. multitask learning. machine learning, 28(1):41   75,

1997.

[21] silvia chiappa, s  ebastien racaniere, daan wierstra, and shakir mo-

hamed. recurrent environment simulators. in iclr, 2017.

[22] paul christiano, zain shah, igor mordatch, jonas schneider, trevor
blackwell, joshua tobin, pieter abbeel, and wojciech zaremba. trans-
fer from simulation to real world through learning deep inverse
dynamics model. arxiv:1610.03518, 2016.

[23] giuseppe cuccu, matthew luciw, j  urgen schmidhuber, and faustino
intrinsically motivated neuroevolution for vision-based

gomez.
id23. in icdl, volume 2, 2011.

[24] peter dayan.

improving generalization for temporal difference
learning: the successor representation. neural computation, 5(4):
613   624, 1993.

[25] jeffrey dean, greg corrado, rajat monga, kai chen, matthieu devin,
mark mao, andrew senior, paul tucker, ke yang, quoc v le, et al.
large scale distributed deep networks. in nips, 2012.
[26] marc p deisenroth, gerhard neumann, and jan peters. a survey on
policy search for robotics. foundations and trends r(cid:13) in robotics, 2
(1   2), 2013.

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

14

[27] misha denil, pulkit agrawal, tejas d kulkarni, tom erez, peter
battaglia, and nando de freitas. learning to perform physics ex-
periments via deep id23. in iclr, 2017.

[28] yan duan, xi chen, rein houthooft, john schulman, and pieter
abbeel. benchmarking deep id23 for continuous
control. in icml, 2016.

[29] yan duan, john schulman, xi chen, peter l bartlett, ilya sutskever,
and pieter abbeel. rl2: fast id23 via slow
id23. in nips workshop on deep reinforcement
learning, 2016.

[30] gabriel dulac-arnold, richard evans, hado van hasselt, peter sune-
hag, timothy lillicrap, jonathan hunt, timothy mann, theophane we-
ber, thomas degris, and ben coppin. deep id23
in large discrete action spaces. arxiv:1512.07679, 2015.

[31] david ferrucci, eric brown, jennifer chu-carroll, james fan, david
gondek, aditya a kalyanpur, adam lally, j william murdock, eric
nyberg, john prager, et al. building watson: an overview of the
deepqa project. ai magazine, 31(3):59   79, 2010.

[32] chelsea finn, xin yu tan, yan duan, trevor darrell, sergey levine,
and pieter abbeel. deep spatial autoencoders for visuomotor learn-
ing. in icra, 2016.

[33] jakob foerster, yannis m assael, nando de freitas, and shimon white-
son. learning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement
learning. in nips, 2016.

[34] michael c fu. gradient estimation. handbooks in operations

research and management science, 13:575   616, 2006.

[35] marta garnelo, kai arulkumaran, and murray shanahan. towards
deep symbolic id23. in nips workshop on deep
id23, 2016.

[36] peter w glynn. likelihood ratio gradient estimation for stochastic

systems. communications of the acm, 33(10):75   84, 1990.

[37] faustino gomez and j  urgen schmidhuber. evolving modular fast-

weight networks for control. in icann, 2005.

[38] ian goodfellow, jean pouget-abadie, mehdi mirza, bing xu, david
warde-farley, sherjil ozair, aaron courville, and yoshua bengio.
generative adversarial nets. in nips, 2014.

[39] audrunas gruslys, mohammad gheshlaghi azar, marc g bellemare,
the reactor: a sample-ef   cient actor-critic

and r  emi munos.
architecture. arxiv:1704.04651, 2017.

[40] shixiang gu, timothy lillicrap, ilya sutskever, and sergey levine.
in

continuous deep id24 with model-based acceleration.
iclr, 2016.

[41] shixiang gu, timothy lillicrap, zoubin ghahramani, richard e
turner, and sergey levine. q-prop: sample-ef   cient policy gradient
with an off-policy critic. in iclr, 2017.

[42] shixiang gu, timothy lillicrap, zoubin ghahramani, richard e
turner, bernhard sch  olkopf, and sergey levine.
interpolated policy
gradient: merging on-policy and off-policy gradient estimation for
deep id23. in nips, 2017.

[43] mance e harmon and leemon c baird iii. multi-player residual
advantage learning with general function approximation. technical
report, dtic, 1996.

[44] matthew hausknecht and peter stone. deep recurrent id24 for

partially observable mdps. in aaai fall symposium series, 2015.

[45] nicolas heess, jonathan j hunt, timothy p lillicrap, and david silver.
in nips

memory-based control with recurrent neural networks.
workshop on deep id23, 2015.

[46] nicolas heess, gregory wayne, david silver, tim lillicrap, tom erez,
and yuval tassa. learning continuous control policies by stochastic
value gradients. in nips, 2015.

[47] nicolas heess, srinivasan sriram, jay lemmon, josh merel, greg
wayne, yuval tassa, tom erez, ziyu wang, ali eslami, martin
riedmiller, et al. emergence of locomotion behaviours in rich
environments. arxiv:1707.02286, 2017.

[48] johannes heinrich and david silver. deep id23

from self-play in imperfect-information games. 2016.

[49] todd hester, matej vecerik, olivier pietquin, marc lanctot, tom
schaul, bilal piot, andrew sendonaris, gabriel dulac-arnold, ian
osband, john agapiou, et al. learning from demonstrations for real
world id23. arxiv:1704.03732, 2017.

[50] geoffrey hinton, oriol vinyals, and jeff dean. distilling the knowl-

[51] jonathan ho and stefano ermon. generative adversarial imitation

edge in a neural network. 2014.

learning. in nips, 2016.

[52] rein houthooft, xi chen, yan duan, john schulman, filip de turck,
and pieter abbeel. vime: variational information maximizing explo-
ration. in nips, 2016.

[53] ahmed hussein, mohamed medhat gaber, and eyad elyan. deep

active learning for autonomous navigation. in eann, 2016.

[54] max jaderberg, volodymyr mnih, wojciech marian czarnecki, tom
schaul, joel z leibo, david silver, and koray kavukcuoglu. re-
in iclr,
inforcement learning with unsupervised auxiliary tasks.
2017.

[55] matthew johnson, katja hofmann, tim hutton, and david bignell.
in

the malmo platform for arti   cial intelligence experimentation.
ijcai, 2016.

[56] leslie p kaelbling, michael l littman, and anthony r cassandra.
planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains.
arti   cial intelligence, 101(1):99   134, 1998.

[57] sham m kakade. a natural policy gradient. in nips, 2002.
[58] ken kansky, tom silver, david a m  ely, mohamed eldawy, miguel
l  azaro-gredilla, xinghua lou, nimrod dorfman, szymon sidor, scott
phoenix, and dileep george. schema networks: zero-shot transfer
with a generative causal model of intuitive physics. in icml, 2017.
[59] hilbert j kappen. path integrals and symmetry breaking for optimal

control theory. jstat, 2005(11):p11011, 2005.

[60] micha   kempka, marek wydmuch, grzegorz runc, jakub toczek, and
wojciech ja  skowski. vizdoom: a doom-based ai research platform
for visual id23. in cig, 2016.

[61] diederik p kingma and max welling. auto-encoding variational

bayes. in iclr, 2014.

[62] nate kohl and peter stone. policy gradient id23

for fast quadrupedal locomotion. in icra, volume 3, 2004.

[63] vijay r konda and john n tsitsiklis. on actor-critic algorithms.

sicon, 42(4):1143   1166, 2003.

[64] jan koutn    k, giuseppe cuccu, j  urgen schmidhuber, and faustino
gomez. evolving large-scale neural networks for vision-based
id23. in gecco, 2013.

[65] tejas d kulkarni, karthik narasimhan, ardavan saeedi, and josh
tenenbaum. hierarchical deep id23: integrating
temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. in nips, 2016.

[66] tejas d kulkarni, ardavan saeedi, simanta gautam, and samuel j ger-
shman. deep successor id23. in nips workshop
on deep id23, 2016.

[67] tze leung lai and herbert robbins. asymptotically ef   cient adaptive
allocation rules. advances in applied mathematics, 6(1):4   22, 1985.
[68] brenden m lake, tomer d ullman, joshua b tenenbaum, and
samuel j gershman. building machines that learn and think like
people. the behavioral and brain sciences, page 1, 2016.

[69] sascha lange, martin riedmiller, and arne voigtlander. autonomous
id23 on raw visual input data in a real world
application. in ijid98, 2012.

[70] yann lecun, yoshua bengio, and geoffrey hinton. deep learning.

nature, 521(7553):436   444, 2015.

[71] joel z leibo, vinicius zambaldi, marc lanctot, janusz marecki, and
thore graepel. multi-agent id23 in sequential
social dilemmas. in aamas, 2017.

[72] sergey levine and pieter abbeel. learning neural network policies
with guided policy search under unknown dynamics. in nips, 2014.
[73] sergey levine and vladlen koltun. guided policy search. in iclr,

2013.

[74] sergey levine, chelsea finn, trevor darrell, and pieter abbeel. end-
to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. jmlr, 17(39):1   40,
2016.

[75] sergey levine, peter pastor, alex krizhevsky, and deirdre quillen.
learning hand-eye coordination for robotic grasping with deep
learning and large-scale data collection. in iser, 2016.

[76] ke li and jitendra malik. learning to optimize. 2017.
[77] xiujun li, lihong li, jianfeng gao, xiaodong he, jianshu chen,
li deng, and ji he. recurrent id23: a hybrid
approach. arxiv:1509.03044, 2015.

[78] yuxi li.

deep id23: an overview.

arxiv:1701.07274, 2017.

[79] timothy p lillicrap, jonathan j hunt, alexander pritzel, nicolas heess,
tom erez, yuval tassa, david silver, and daan wierstra. continuous
control with deep id23. in iclr, 2016.

[80] long-ji lin. self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement
learning, planning and teaching. machine learning, 8(3   4):293   321,
1992.

[81] luke metz, julian ibarz, navdeep jaitly, and james davidson. dis-
crete sequential prediction of continuous actions for deep rl.
arxiv:1705.05035, 2017.

[82] piotr mirowski, razvan pascanu, fabio viola, hubert soyer, andy bal-
lard, andrea banino, misha denil, ross goroshin, laurent sifre, koray

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

15

kavukcuoglu, et al. learning to navigate in complex environments.
in iclr, 2017.

[83] volodymyr mnih, nicolas heess, alex graves,

kavukcuoglu. recurrent models of visual attention.
2014.

and koray
in nips,

[84] volodymyr mnih, koray kavukcuoglu, david silver, andrei a rusu,
joel veness, marc g bellemare, alex graves, martin riedmiller,
andreas k fidjeland, georg ostrovski, et al. human-level control
through deep id23. nature, 518(7540):529   533,
2015.

[85] volodymyr mnih, adria puigdomenech badia, mehdi mirza, alex
graves, timothy p lillicrap, tim harley, david silver, and koray
kavukcuoglu. asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learn-
ing. in iclr, 2016.

[86] shakir mohamed and danilo jimenez rezende. variational information
maximisation for intrinsically motivated id23. in
nips, 2015.

[87] andrew william moore. ef   cient memory-based learning for robot
control. technical report, university of cambridge, computer labo-
ratory, 1990.

[88] r  emi munos, tom stepleton, anna harutyunyan, and marc g belle-
mare. safe and ef   cient off-policy id23. in nips,
2016.

[89] o   r nachum, mohammad norouzi, kelvin xu, and dale schuurmans.
bridging the gap between value and policy based reinforcement
learning. arxiv:1702.08892, 2017.

[90] anusha nagabandi, gregory kahn, ronald s fearing, and sergey
levine. neural network dynamics for model-based deep reinforce-
ment learning with model-free fine-tuning. arxiv:1708.02596, 2017.
[91] arun nair, praveen srinivasan, sam blackwell, cagdas alcicek, rory
fearon, alessandro de maria, vedavyas panneershelvam, mustafa
suleyman, charles beattie, stig petersen, et al. massively parallel
in icml workshop on
methods for deep id23.
deep learning, 2015.

[92] andrew y ng and stuart j russell. algorithms for inverse reinforce-

ment learning. in icml, 2000.

[93] andrew y ng, adam coates, mark diel, varun ganapathi, jamie
schulte, ben tse, eric berger, and eric liang. autonomous inverted
helicopter flight via id23. experimental robotics,
pages 363   372, 2006.

[94] brendan o   donoghue, r  emi munos, koray kavukcuoglu, and
volodymyr mnih. pgq: combining policy gradient and id24.
in iclr, 2017.

[95] junhyuk oh, xiaoxiao guo, honglak lee, richard l lewis, and
satinder singh. action-conditional video prediction using deep
networks in atari games. in nips, 2015.

[96] junhyuk oh, valliappa chockalingam, satinder singh, and honglak
lee. control of memory, active perception, and action in minecraft.
in iclr, 2016.

[97] ian osband, charles blundell, alexander pritzel, and benjamin

van roy. deep exploration via bootstrapped id25. in nips, 2016.

[98] emilio parisotto and ruslan salakhutdinov. neural map: structured
memory for deep id23. arxiv:1702.08360, 2017.
[99] emilio parisotto, jimmy l ba, and ruslan salakhutdinov. actor-
mimic: deep multitask and transfer id23. in iclr,
2016.

[100] razvan pascanu, yujia li, oriol vinyals, nicolas heess, lars buesing,
sebastien racani`ere, david reichert, th  eophane weber, daan wier-
stra, and peter battaglia. learning model-based planning from scratch.
arxiv:1707.06170, 2017.

[101] deepak pathak, pulkit agrawal, alexei a efros, and trevor darrell.
curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised prediction. in icml,
2017.

[102] peng peng, ying wen, yaodong yang, quan yuan, zhenkun tang,
haitao long, and jun wang. multiagent bidirectionally-coordinated
nets: emergence of human-level coordination in learning to play
starcraft combat games. arxiv:1703.10069, 2017.

[103] jan peters, katharina m  ulling, and yasemin altun. relative id178

policy search. in aaai, 2010.

[104] dean a pomerleau. alvinn, an autonomous land vehicle in
a neural network. technical report, carnegie mellon university,
computer science department, 1989.

[105] alexander pritzel, benigno uria, sriram srinivasan, adri`a puig-
dom`enech, oriol vinyals, demis hassabis, daan wierstra, and charles
blundell. neural episodic control. in icml, 2017.

[106] marc   aurelio ranzato, sumit chopra, michael auli, and wojciech
zaremba. sequence level training with recurrent neural networks.

in iclr, 2016.

[107] benjamin recht, christopher re, stephen wright, and feng niu.
hogwild: a lock-free approach to parallelizing stochastic gradient
descent. in nips, 2011.

[108] danilo jimenez rezende, shakir mohamed, and daan wierstra.
stochastic id26 and approximate id136 in deep gen-
erative models. in icml, 2014.

[109] martin riedmiller. neural fitted q iteration   first experiences with
in ecml,

a data ef   cient neural id23 method.
2005.

[110] st  ephane ross, geoffrey j gordon, and drew bagnell. a reduction
of imitation learning and id170 to no-regret online
learning. in aistats, 2011.

[111] david e rumelhart, geoffrey e hinton, and ronald j williams. learn-
ing representations by back-propagating errors. cognitive modeling,
5(3):1, 1988.

[112] gavin a rummery and mahesan niranjan. on-line id24 using
connectionist systems. university of cambridge, department of
engineering, 1994.

[113] andrei a rusu, sergio gomez colmenarejo, caglar gulcehre, guil-
laume desjardins, james kirkpatrick, razvan pascanu, volodymyr
mnih, koray kavukcuoglu, and raia hadsell. policy distillation. in
iclr, 2016.

[114] andrei a rusu, neil c rabinowitz, guillaume desjardins, hubert
soyer, james kirkpatrick, koray kavukcuoglu, razvan pascanu, and
raia hadsell. progressive neural networks. arxiv:1606.04671, 2016.
[115] andrei a rusu, matej vecerik, thomas roth  orl, nicolas heess, razvan
pascanu, and raia hadsell. sim-to-real robot learning from pixels
with progressive nets. in corl, 2017.

[116] tim salimans, jonathan ho, xi chen, and ilya sutskever. evolu-
tion strategies as a scalable alternative to id23.
arxiv:1703.03864, 2017.

[117] tom schaul, daniel horgan, karol gregor, and david silver. universal

value function approximators. in icml, 2015.

[118] tom schaul, john quan, ioannis antonoglou, and david silver. pri-

oritized experience replay. in iclr, 2016.

[119] j  urgen schmidhuber. a possibility for implementing curiosity and

boredom in model-building neural controllers. in sab, 1991.

[120] j  urgen schmidhuber and rudolf huber. learning to generate arti   cial
ijns, 2(01n02):125   134,

fovea trajectories for target detection.
1991.

[121] john schulman, nicolas heess, theophane weber, and pieter abbeel.
gradient estimation using stochastic computation graphs. in nips,
2015.

[122] john schulman, sergey levine, pieter abbeel, michael jordan, and

philipp moritz. trust region policy optimization. in icml, 2015.

[123] john schulman, philipp moritz, sergey levine, michael jordan, and
pieter abbeel. high-dimensional continuous control using general-
ized advantage estimation. in iclr, 2016.

[124] john schulman, pieter abbeel, and xi chen. equivalence between

policy gradients and soft id24. arxiv:1704.06440, 2017.

[125] john schulman, filip wolski, prafulla dhariwal, alec radford,
proximal policy optimization algorithms.

and oleg klimov.
arxiv:1707.06347, 2017.

[126] bobak shahriari, kevin swersky, ziyu wang, ryan p adams, and
nando de freitas. taking the human out of the loop: a review
of bayesian optimization. proc. of the ieee, 104(1):148   175, 2016.
[127] david silver, guy lever, nicolas heess, thomas degris, daan wier-
stra, and martin riedmiller. deterministic policy gradient algorithms.
in icml, 2014.

[128] david silver, aja huang, chris j maddison, arthur guez, lau-
rent sifre, george van den driessche, julian schrittwieser, ioannis
antonoglou, veda panneershelvam, marc lanctot, et al. mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature,
529(7587):484   489, 2016.

[129] satinder singh, diane litman, michael kearns, and marilyn walker.
optimizing dialogue management with id23: ex-
periments with the njfun system. jair, 16:105   133, 2002.

[130] ivan sorokin, alexey seleznev, mikhail pavlov, aleksandr fedorov,
in

and anastasiia ignateva. deep attention recurrent q-network.
nips workshop on deep id23, 2015.

[131] bradley c stadie, pieter abbeel, and ilya sutskever. third person

imitation learning. in iclr, 2017.

[132] bradly c stadie, sergey levine, and pieter abbeel.

incentivizing
exploration in id23 with deep predictive models.
in nips workshop on deep id23, 2015.

[133] alexander l strehl, lihong li, eric wiewiora, john langford, and

ieee signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understanding (arxiv extended version)

16

michael l littman. pac model-free id23.
icml, 2006.

in

[134] sainbayar sukhbaatar, arthur szlam, and rob fergus.

learning

multiagent communication with id26. in nips, 2016.

[135] richard s sutton and andrew g barto. id23: an

introduction. mit press, 1998.

[136] richard s sutton, doina precup, and satinder singh.

between
mdps and semi-mdps: a framework for temporal abstraction in
id23. arti   cial intelligence, 112(1   2):181   211,
1999.

[137] gabriel synnaeve, nantas nardelli, alex auvolat, soumith chintala,
timoth  ee lacroix, zeming lin, florian richoux, and nicolas usunier.
torchcraft: a library for machine learning research on real-time
strategy games. arxiv:1611.00625, 2016.

[138] aviv tamar, yi wu, garrett thomas, sergey levine, and pieter abbeel.

value iteration networks. in nips, 2016.

[139] haoran tang, rein houthooft, davis foote, adam stooke, xi chen,
yan duan, john schulman, filip de turck, and pieter abbeel. #explo-
ration: a study of count-based exploration for deep reinforcement
learning. in nips, 2017.

[140] yee whye teh, victor bapst, wojciech marian czarnecki, john quan,
james kirkpatrick, raia hadsell, nicolas heess, and razvan pascanu.
distral: robust multitask id23. in nips, 2017.

[141] gerald tesauro. temporal difference learning and td-gammon.

communications of the acm, 38(3):58   68, 1995.

[142] gerald tesauro, rajarshi das, hoi chan, jeffrey kephart, david
levine, freeman rawson, and charles lefurgy. managing power con-
sumption and performance of computing systems using reinforcement
learning. in nips, 2008.

[143] chen tessler, shahar givony, tom zahavy, daniel j mankowitz, and
shie mannor. a deep hierarchical approach to lifelong learning in
minecraft. in aaai, 2017.

[144] emanuel todorov, tom erez, and yuval tassa. mujoco: a physics

engine for model-based control. in iros, 2012.

[145] john n tsitsiklis and benjamin van roy. analysis of temporal-

difference learning with function approximation. in nips, 1997.

[146] eric tzeng, coline devin, judy hoffman, chelsea finn, xingchao
peng, sergey levine, kate saenko, and trevor darrell. towards
adapting deep visuomotor representations from simulated to real
environments. in wafr, 2016.

[147] nicolas usunier, gabriel synnaeve, zeming lin, and soumith chintala.
episodic exploration for deep deterministic policies: an application
to starcraft micromanagement tasks. in iclr, 2017.
[148] hado van hasselt. double id24. in nips, 2010.
[149] hado van hasselt, arthur guez, and david silver. deep reinforcement

learning with double id24. in aaai, 2016.

[150] harm vanseijen and rich sutton. a deeper look at planning as

learning from replay. in icml, 2015.

[151] alexander vezhnevets, volodymyr mnih, simon osindero, alex
graves, oriol vinyals, john agapiou, and koray kavukcuoglu. strate-
gic attentive writer for learning macro-actions. in nips, 2016.

[152] alexander sasha vezhnevets, simon osindero, tom schaul, nicolas
heess, max jaderberg, david silver, and koray kavukcuoglu. feudal
networks for hierarchical id23. in icml, 2017.

[153] oriol vinyals, timo ewalds, sergey bartunov, petko georgiev, alexan-
der sasha vezhnevets, michelle yeo, alireza makhzani, heinrich
k  uttler, john agapiou, julian schrittwieser, et al. starcraft ii: a new
challenge for id23. arxiv:1708.04782, 2017.

[154] niklas wahlstr  om, thomas b sch  on, and marc p deisenroth. learning
ifac sysid, 48(28),

deep dynamical models from image pixels.
2015.

[155] niklas wahlstr  om, thomas b sch  on, and marc p deisenroth. from
pixels to torques: policy learning with deep dynamical models. in
icml workshop on deep learning, 2015.

[156] jane x wang, zeb kurth-nelson, dhruva tirumala, hubert soyer,
joel z leibo, r  emi munos, charles blundell, dharshan kumaran, and
matt botvinick. learning to reinforcement learn. in cogsci, 2017.
[157] ziyu wang, nando de freitas, and marc lanctot. dueling network

architectures for deep id23. in iclr, 2016.

[158] ziyu wang, victor bapst, nicolas heess, volodymyr mnih, r  emi
munos, koray kavukcuoglu, and nando de freitas. sample ef   cient
actor-critic with experience replay. in iclr, 2017.

[159] christopher jch watkins and peter dayan. id24. machine

learning, 8(3-4):279   292, 1992.

[160] manuel watter, jost springenberg, joschka boedecker, and martin
riedmiller. embed to control: a locally linear latent dynamics
model for control from raw images. in nips, 2015.

[161] th  eophane weber, s  ebastien racani`ere, david p reichert, lars
buesing, arthur guez, danilo jimenez rezende, adria puigdom`enech
badia, oriol vinyals, nicolas heess, yujia li, et al.
imagination-
augmented agents for deep id23. in nips, 2017.
[162] paul john werbos. beyond regression: new tools for prediction
and analysis in the behavioral sciences. technical report, harvard
university, applied mathematics, 1974.

[163] daan wierstra, alexander f  orster, jan peters, and j  urgen schmidhuber.
recurrent policy gradients. logic journal of the igpl, 18(5):620   634,
2010.

[164] ronald j williams. simple statistical gradient-following algorithms
for connectionist id23. machine learning, 8(3-4):
229   256, 1992.

[165] markus wulfmeier, peter ondruska, and ingmar posner. maximum
id178 deep inverse id23. in nips workshop on
deep id23, 2015.

[166] kelvin xu, jimmy ba, ryan kiros, kyunghyun cho, aaron c
courville, ruslan salakhutdinov, richard s zemel, and yoshua bengio.
show, attend and tell: neural image id134 with visual
attention. in icml, volume 14, 2015.

[167] yuke zhu, roozbeh mottaghi, eric kolve, joseph j lim, abhinav
gupta, li fei-fei, and ali farhadi. target-driven visual navigation
in indoor scenes using deep id23. in icra, 2017.
[168] barret zoph and quoc v le. neural architecture search with

id23. in iclr, 2017.

kai arulkumaran (ka709@imperial.ac.uk) is a ph.d. candidate in the
department of bioengineering at imperial college london. he received a
b.a. in computer science at the university of cambridge in 2012, and an
m.sc. in biomedical engineering at imperial college london in 2014. he
was a research intern in twitter magic pony and microsoft research in
2017. his research focus is deep id23 and id21
for visuomotor control.

marc peter deisenroth (m.deisenroth@imperial.ac.uk) is a lecturer in
statistical machine learning in the department of computing at imperial
college london and with prowler.io. he received an m.eng. in computer
science at the university of karlsruhe in 2006 and a ph.d. in machine
learning at the karlsruhe institute of technology in 2009. he has been
awarded an imperial college research fellowship in 2014 and received best
paper awards at icra 2014 and iccas 2016. he is a recipient of a google
faculty research award and a microsoft ph.d. scholarship. his research
is centred around data-ef   cient machine learning for autonomous decision
making.

miles brundage (miles.brundage@philosophy.ox.ac.uk) is a ph.d. candidate
in human and social dimensions of science and technology at arizona
state university, and a research fellow at the university of oxford   s future
of humanity institute. he received a b.a. in political science at george
washington university in 2010. his research focuses on governance issues
related to arti   cial intelligence.

anil anthony bharath (a.bharath@imperial.ac.uk) is a reader in the de-
partment of bioengineering at imperial college london and a fellow of the
institution of engineering and technology. he received a b.eng. in electronic
and electrical engineering from university college london in 1988, and
a ph.d. in signal processing from imperial college london in 1993. he
was an academic visitor in the signal processing group at the university of
cambridge in 2006. he is a co-founder of cortexica vision systems. his
research interests are in deep architectures for visual id136.

