named entity: history and future 

satoshi sekine  
new york university 
715 broadway, 7th  floor 
newyork, ny 10003  usa 

sekine@cs.nyu.edu 

 
 
this paper surveys named entity (ne) related research. it includes the history of ne, the problems it faces at 
the moment, and the possible directions for solving these problems in the future. we hope the paper will be 
useful for people who are interested in the research on ne and technology related to it. 

 
1.  orthodox named entity 

 
the term    named entity (ne)   , widely used in information extraction (ie), id53 (qa) or other 
natural  language  processing  (nlp)  applications,  was  born  in  the  message  understanding  conferences 
(muc) which influenced ie research in the u.s. in the 1990   s [grishman and sundheim 1996] (to be precise, it 
was introduced for muc-6 in 1995). at that time, muc focused on ie tasks where structured information of 
company  activities  and  defense  related  activities is extracted  from unstructured  text,  such  as newspaper 
articles. in the course of system development, people noticed that it is important to recognize information units 
like names, including person, organization and location names, and numeric expressions including time, date, 
money and percent expressions. extracting these entities was recognized as one of the important sub-tasks of 
ie. as this task is relatively independent, it has been evaluated separately in several different languages, e.g. 
japanese, chinese and spanish in met (multilingual entity tracking) project. outside the u.s., there have 
been  several  evaluation-based  projects  for  ne,  as  one  of  the  tasks  of  irex  (information  retrieval  and 
extraction exercise) in japan [sekine and isahara 2000] [irex hp], and as the shared task in conll in 2002 
and 2003 for four languages, english, german, dutch and spanish [conll hp]. in the irex project, a new 
category    artifact   , such as    odyssey    as a book title or    windows    as a product name, was added to the original 
muc categories. the ne task in muc was inherited by the ace project in the u.s., where 2 new categories 
are added, gpe (geographical and political entities, such as    france    or    new york   ) and facility, such as 
   empire state building   . around this time, the number of categories is limited to 7 to 10, and the ne taggers, 
automatic annotation systems for ne entities in unstructured text, are based on 1) dictionaries and rules 
which were made by hand or 2) some supervised learning technique. more recent and currently dominating 
technology is the supervised learning techniques, which include decision tree [sekine 1998], hidden markov 
model (id48) [bikel et. al 1997], maximum id178 model (me) [borthwick 1998], support vector machine 
(id166) [asahara 2003], boosting and voted id88 [collins 2000] and id49 (crfs) 
[mccallum and li 2003]. the ne extraction task has been the experimental sandbox for various forms of 
supervised learning. 
 

2.  need for extended named entity 

 
as already explained, the categories of ne have different variations, but the expansion of ie applications and 
the appearance of a new related task, id53 (qa) gave rise to the need for a drastic extension of 
ne categories. in the ie field, the category of ie depends on the scenario (the target information class of the 

ie). when the scenario was    corporate merger   , the seven categories were enough; however, once the scenario 
changed to    rocket launch    or    disease outbreak   , we need    names of rockets    or    disease names   . the wider 
the ie tasks become, the more categories of ne are needed. qa research aims to make a system which can 
produce an answer like    nobel peace prize    to a question like    what is the name of an international prize the 
korean president kim dae received in 2002?    [trec-qa hp]. ne plays an important role in creating such a 
system. typical systems analyze the answer type from the question sentence, in our example, from    prize   , and 
the system searches for an answer of the analyzed type based on evidence such as a keyword in near context. 
as  we  can  easily  imagine,  we  need  a  large  number  of  categories  in  order  to  create  a  system  capable  of 
answering a wide variety of questions. 
 also,  there  are  new  fields  where  an  ne-related  task  becomes  an  important  component  technology.  for 
example, in bio-informatics, recognizing names of proteins or genes is crucial. there are on-going efforts to 
make such an extended ne [isi hp] [sekine 2002] [genia ontology]. 
 
3. problems caused by the extension 
 
in  this  section,  we  will  discuss  the  two  major  problems  caused  by  the  extension  of  ne  categories.  the 
discussion  is  based  on  the  author   s  own  experience  of  creating  a     200  category  extended  named  entity 
hierarchy   . the 200 category extended ne was created for the purpose of covering major general newspaper 
scenarios. 
 the first problem is the definition of the categories. even when we had a small number of categories, there 
were  long  discussions,  arguments,  and a  bit  artificial  solution to define  the categories. now  the  problem 
becomes much prominent, although in some particular cases, extending the categories helps in finding the 
right category for an entity. for example,    the supreme court   , which was ambiguous between a location and 
an organization in the smaller ne can be clearly classified as a goe, which is a facility with identity. however, 
there are more cases where it becomes difficult to find the right category, e.g. whether a civil strife is a war or 
an affair, whether a typhoon with a minor casualties is a natural phenomena or a natural disaster, ambiguity 
between a religion and the group of people who believe it, or the definition of ethnic group. this is the problem 
of  categorizing  the  world  into  semantic  categories,  and  finding  the  right  category  for  each  word  (of  each 
occurrence).  we  believe  that  there  is  no  ultimate  solution,  so  we  seek  rather  empirical  solution.  in  the 
development of our categories, we empirically surveyed a large volume of newspaper articles, application 
systems like information extraction and id53 and already created thesaurus. also, we made 
definitions with a lot of examples in addition to the verbal definition of each category, as the verbal definition 
itself can   t be concrete enough to define most categories. 
 the other problem caused by the extension of the categories is the problem of ne tagging actual text. when 
we have a small number of categories, people use supervised learning methods based on a relatively large 
amount of annotated data. however it is not so easy now with a large number of categories. actually, we 
annotated 30 days of japanese newspaper articles with 200 categories [sekine 2004], but it is not easy to 
maintain consistency and there are categories for which not so many examples are found in the newspaper 
articles. another strategy is to use hand-crafted dictionaries and rules. here we also tried to gather lists of 
names from the web, but lists could not cover all and sometimes the expressions are incompatible with those 
in newspaper articles. as far as i know, there is no good solution to this problem and many people in this area 
are struggling creating dictionaries and rules by hand. 
 
4. directions to the solution 

 however, there are possible directions to solve the problems. the basic idea for the all directions mentioned 

 

here is to reduce the burden of annotation/supervision in the training, as the fully supervised training methods 
seem unreasonable. also, the availability of a huge corpus plays an important role. currently huge corpora, 
like tens of years of newspaper or more than 10gb of web texts, are available. we have an opportunity to 
utilize the data and extract useful information from them. an example of the utilization of a huge corpus, 
although not an ne application, is reported in [banko and brill 2001]. 
 
weakly supervised 
the term    weakly supervised    (or semi-supervised) has been used relatively recently. the major technique in 
this category is called    id64   . in this method, a small degree of supervision, such as a set of seeds, is 
used at the beginning. for example, in order to extract    disease names   , five initial disease names are given to 
the system. then the system searches the sentences that contain the names, and finds the strong indicators of 
context where the five disease names appear. now, the system tries to find other instances that appear in the 
context. by repeating these processes, a large number of disease names can be gathered. examples of this type 
of research include [riloff 1999] [yangarber 2000] [collins 1999]. the same method can be applied to extract 
relations of entities, such as book title and author from seeds like    shakespeare    and    haid113t    [brin 1998] [lin 
and pantel 2000]. 
 
active learning 
in the supervised methods, in general, the larger the training data, the better accuracy the system can get. 
however, annotating a large corpus is not easy. so an attractive alternative idea is to annotate only the data 
which can help to improve the overall accuracy. the favorite practice is to annotate the data which is tagged 
with uncertainty by the current system. there are several studies in this area, although the target is not 
named entities [ngai and yarowsky 2000] [sassano et .al 2002]. 
 
unsupervised learning 
the typical approach of unsupervised learning is id91. for example, we can try to gather named entities 
from the clustered groups based on the similarity of context. 

there are unsupervised methods other than id91. one of the promising examples is to use linguistic 
knowledge in order to extract information from a huge corpus. [hearst 1992] proposed to extract examples of 
hyponym and hypernym relationships using phrases like    a such as b   . we believe that similar technique can 
be applied in order to extract named entities. 

these research efforts focused on extracting information using the knowledge underlying a corpus, rather 
than looking at the corpus as a sequence of characters. anyway, it is only very recently that we can afford to 
deal with more than 1gb texts; we believe we are about breaking a new ground. 
 
5. relationships to the other research area 
 
terminology 

there  are  close  relationships  between  terminology  research  and  ne  research.  a  definition  of     term     is 
controversial, but one of the definitions is    lexical units mostly/mainly used in a specific domain    [kageura 2002]. 
the problem is what is a    domain   . if we view the newspaper as a set of different domains, like politics, 
economics, sports or entertainment, the named entities for newspaper are genuine terms by this definition. also 
in the bio-informatics field, the names of proteins or genes are surely terms, even though the current technique 
used in extracting such expressions inherits ne recognition technology. in terms of finding named entities, in 
particular those in small categories in the extended ne, we believe the technology developed in terminology will 
be very useful. 

 

sense disambiguation and thesaurus 
as  the  number  of  categories  becomes  larger,  ne  tagging  becomes  more  similar  to  the  problem  of  sense 
disambiguation or finding the appropriate node in a thesaurus for the entity, as evaluated in senseval 
[senseval hp]. indeed there are id53 systems which use a thesaurus like id138 [id138 
hp] for finding the type of an entity. however, the current id138 includes mostly common nouns rather 
than  proper  nouns  or  names.  also  it  is  not  so  conceivable  that  each  node  in  the  thesaurus  will  include 
corresponding  proper  names.  however,  in  japanese,  a  recently  published  thesaurus,  nihongo-goi-taikei, 
includes common nouns and proper nouns together, and it is a useful resource for the study of named entities.  
 
unknown word problem 
named entities are often unknown words which are not in the dictionary. especially this fact causes a serious 
problem in languages without word delimiters like japanese or chinese. most morphological analyzers are 
confused when they encounter unknown words and segment them in an inappropriate manner. there are 
several studies to deal with the unknown word problem in japanese [mori and nagao 1996] [uchimoto et. al 
2001]. 
 
5. summary 
 
we briefly presented the history of named entity research, the problems we encounter and directions for a 
possible solution. currently, the named entity task is changing from tagging only proper names to tagging a 
broader range of words and expressions that are of interest to people with particular information needs. in any 
case,  the  named  entity  or  extended  named  entity  task  is  definitely  one  of  the  important  component 
technologies for the applications of natural language technologies.  
 
bibliography 
 
m. asahara and y. matsumoto:    japanese named entity extraction with redundant morphological analysis   , 

m. banko and e. brill:    scaling to very very large corpora for natural language disambiguation. acl/eacl 2001. 
d. bikel, s. miller, richard schwartz and ralph weischedel:    nymble: a high-performance learning name finder    

hlt-naacl 2003. 

anlp 1997. 

a.  borthwick,  j.  sterling,  e.  agichtein,  r.  grishman,     exploiting  diverse  knowledge  sources  via  maximum 

id178 in id39   , wvlc 98. 

b.  s. brin:    extracting patterns and relations from the world wide web    edbt 98. 
m. collins, y. singer    unsupervised models for named entity classification   , emnlp 1999. 
m. collins:    ranking algorithms for named   entity extraction: boosting and the voted id88   , acl 2000 
e. riloff, r. jones:    learning dictionaries for information extraction by multi-level id64   , aaai 1999. 
r. grishman, b. sundheim,    message understanding conference - 6: a brief history   , coling-96. 
m. hearst:    automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora    coling 1992. 
k. kageura and b. umino:    methods of automatic term recognition   , trminology. vol. 3, no. 2, 1996 
k. kageura:    the dynamics of terminology: a descriptive theory of term formation and terminological 

e

growth.    amsterdam: john benjamins, 2002. 

d. lin, p. pantel:    concept discovery from text   , coling 2000. 
a. mccallum and w. li,    early results for id39 with id49, fetures 

induction and web-enhanced lexicons   , conll 2003. 

analysis   , coling 1996. 

segmentation   , acl 2002. 

wvlc 98. 

s. mori and m. nagao:    word extraction from corpora and its part-of-speech estimation using distributional 

m.  sassano:     an  empirical  study  of  active  learning  with  support  vector  machines  for  japanese  word 

s. sekine, r. grishman, h. shinnou    a decision tree method for finding and classifying names in japanese texts   , 

s. sekine, h. isahara    irex: ir and ie evaluation project in japanese   , lrec 2000. 
s. sekine, k. sudo, c. nobata:    extended named entity hierarchy   , lrec 2002. 
s. sekine:    definition, dictionaries and tagger for extended named entity hierarchy   , lrec 2004. 
g.  ngai  and  d.  yarowsky:     rule  writing  or  annotation:  cost-efficient  resource  usage  for  base  noun  phrase 

chunking   , acl 2000. 

k. uchimoto, s. sekine and h. isahara:    the unknown word problem: a morphological analysis of japanese using 

maximum id178 aided by a dictionary   , emnlp 2001. 

r. yangarber, w. lin, r. grishman:    unsupervised learning of generalized names    coling 2002. 
ace hp: http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.01/tests/ace. 
irex homepage http://nlp.nyu.edu/irex 
trec-qa homepage http://trec.nist.gov/ 
conll homepage: http://cnts.uia.ac.be/conll2003/ 
senseval homepage: http://www.senseval.org/ 
id138 hp: http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn/ 
the isi question answer typology   webclopedia  hp: http://www.isi.edu/natural-language/projects/webclopedia/ 
genia ontology hp: http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo. ac.jp/ ~genia/topics/corpus/genia-ontology.html 
sekine   s ne homepage: http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/jneh/ 

