id14: an introduction to
the special issue

llu    s m`arquez   
universitat polit`ecnica de catalunya

xavier carreras      
massachusetts institute of technology

kenneth c. litkowski   
cl research

suzanne stevenson   
university of toronto

id14, the computational identi   cation and labeling of arguments in text,
has become a leading task in computational linguistics today. although the issues for this
task have been studied for decades, the availability of large resources and the development of
statistical machine learning methods have heightened the amount of effort in this    eld. this
special issue presents selected and representative work in the    eld. this overview describes
linguistic background of the problem, the movement from linguistic theories to computational
practice, the major resources that are being used, an overview of steps taken in computational
systems, and a description of the key issues and results in id14 (as revealed in
several international evaluations). we assess weaknesses in id14 and identify
important challenges facing the    eld. overall, the opportunities and the potential for useful
further research in id14 are considerable.

1. introduction

the sentence-level semantic analysis of text is concerned with the characterization of
events, such as determining    who    did    what    to    whom,       where,       when,    and
   how.    the predicate of a clause (typically a verb) establishes    what    took place,
and other sentence constituents express the participants in the event (such as    who    and
   where   ), as well as further event properties (such as    when    and    how   ). the primary
task of id14 (srl) is to indicate exactly what semantic relations hold
among a predicate and its associated participants and properties, with these relations

    departament de llenguatges i sistemes inform`atics, universitat polit`ecnica de catalunya, jordi girona
salgado 1   3, 08034 barcelona, spain. e-mail: lluism@lsi.upc.edu.
       computer science and arti   cial intelligence laboratory (csail), mit, 32 vassar st., cambridge, ma
02139, usa. e-mail: carreras@csail.mit.edu.
    cl research, 9208 gue road, damascus, md 20872 usa. e-mail: ken@clres.com.
    department of computer science, 6 king   s college road, toronto, on m5s 3g4, canada.
e-mail: suzanne@cs.toronto.edu.

   2008 association for computational linguistics

computational linguistics

volume 34, number 2

drawn from a pre-speci   ed list of possible semantic roles for that predicate (or class of
predicates). in order to accomplish this, the role-bearing constituents in a clause must
be identi   ed and their correct semantic role labels assigned, as in:

[the girl on the swing]agent [whispered]pred to [the boy beside her]recipient

typical roles used in srl are labels such as agent, patient, and location for the entities
participating in an event, and temporal and manner for the characterization of other
aspects of the event or participant relations. this type of role labeling thus yields a    rst-
level semantic representation of the text that indicates the basic event properties and
relations among relevant entities that are expressed in the sentence.

research has proceeded for decades on manually created lexicons, grammars, and
other semantic resources (hirst 1987; pustejovsky 1995; copestake and flickinger 2000)
in support of deep semantic analysis of language input, but such approaches have been
labor-intensive and often restricted to narrow domains. the 1990s saw a growth in
the development of statistical machine learning methods across the    eld of computa-
tional linguistics, enabling systems to learn complex linguistic knowledge rather than
requiring manual encoding. these methods were shown to be effective in acquiring
knowledge necessary for semantic interpretation, such as the properties of predicates
and the relations to their arguments   for example, learning subcategorization frames
(briscoe and carroll 1997) or classifying verbs according to argument structure prop-
erties (merlo and stevenson 2001; schulte im walde 2006). recently, medium-to-large
corpora have been manually annotated with semantic roles in framenet (fillmore,
ruppenhofer, and baker 2004), propbank (palmer, gildea, and kingsbury 2005), and
nombank (meyers et al. 2004), enabling the development of statistical approaches
speci   cally for srl.

with the advent of supporting resources, srl has become a well-de   ned task with
a substantial body of work and comparative evaluation (see, among others, gildea and
jurafsky [2002], surdeanu et al. [2003], xue and palmer [2004], pradhan et al. [2005a],
the conll shared task in 2004 and 2005, and senseval-3 and semeval-2007). the
identi   cation of event frames may potentially bene   t many natural language processing
(nlp) applications, such as information extraction (surdeanu et al. 2003), question
answering (narayanan and harabagiu 2004), summarization (melli et al. 2005), and
machine translation (boas 2002). related work on classifying the semantic relations in
noun phrases has also been encouraging for nlp tasks (moldovan et al. 2004; rosario
and hearst 2004).

although the use of srl systems in real-world applications has thus far been
limited, the outlook is promising for extending this type of analysis to many appli-
cations requiring some level of semantic interpretation. srl represents an excellent
framework with which to perform research on computational techniques for acquiring
and exploiting semantic relations among the different components of a text.

this special issue of computational linguistics presents several articles represent-
ing the state-of-the-art in srl, and this overview is intended to provide a broader
context for that work. first, we brie   y discuss some of the linguistic views on se-
mantic roles that have had the most in   uence on computational approaches to srl
and related nlp tasks. next, we show how the linguistic notions have in   uenced
the development of resources that support srl. we then provide an overview of
srl methods and describe the state-of-the-art as well as current open problems in the
   eld.

146

m`arquez, carreras, litkowski, and stevenson

id14

2. semantic roles in linguistics

since the foundational work of fillmore (1968), considerable linguistic research has been
devoted to the nature of semantic roles. although there is substantial agreement on
major semantic roles, such as agent and theme, there is no consensus on a de   nitive
list of semantic roles, or even whether such a list exists. proposed lists range from a
large set of situation-speci   c roles, such as suspect, authorities, and offense (fillmore,
ruppenhofer, and baker 2004), to a relatively small set of general roles, such as agent,
theme, location, and goal (typically referred to as thematic roles, as in jackendoff
[1990]), to the set of two core roles, proto-agent and proto-theme, whose entailments
determine the precise relation expressed (dowty 1991). this uncertainty within linguis-
tic theory carries over into computational work on srl, where there is much variability
on the roles assumed in different resources.

a major focus of work in the linguistics community is on the mapping between the
predicate   argument structure that determines the roles, and the syntactic realization of
the recipients of those roles (grimshaw 1990; levin 1993; levin and rappaport hovav
2005). semantic role lists are generally viewed as inadequate for explaining the mor-
phosyntactic behavior of argument expression, with argument realization dependent
on a deeper lexical semantic representation of the components of the event that the
predicate describes. although much of the mapping from argument structure to syntax
is predictable, this mapping is not completely regular, nor entirely understood. an
important question for srl, therefore, is the extent to which performance is degraded
by the irregularities noted in linguistic studies of semantic roles.

nonetheless, suf   cient regularity exists to provide the foundation for meaningful
generalizations. much research has focused on explaining the varied expression of verb
arguments within syntactic positions (levin 1993). a major conclusion of that work is
that the patterns of syntactic alternation exhibit regularity that re   ects an underlying
semantic similarity among verbs, forming the basis for verb classes. such classes, and
the argument structure speci   cations for them, have proven useful in a number of nlp
tasks (habash, dorr, and traum 2003; shi and mihalcea 2005), including srl (swier and
stevenson 2004), and have provided the foundation for the computational verb lexicon
verbnet (kipper, dang, and palmer 2000).

this approach to argument realization focuses on the relation of morphosyntactic
behavior to argument semantics, and typically leads to a general conceptualization of
semantic roles. in frame semantics (fillmore 1976), on the other hand, a word activates
a frame of semantic knowledge that relates linguistic semantics to encyclopedic knowl-
edge. this effort has tended to focus on the delineation of situation-speci   c frames (e.g.,
an arrest frame) and correspondingly more speci   c semantic roles (e.g., suspect and
authorities) that codify the conceptual structure associated with lexical items (fillmore,
ruppenhofer, and baker 2004). with a recognition that many lexical items could activate
any such frame, this approach leads to lexical classes of a somewhat different nature
than those of levin (1993). whereas lexical items in a levin class are syntactically
homogeneous and share coarse semantic properties, items in a frame may syntactically
vary somewhat but share    ne-grained, real-world semantic properties.

a further difference in these perspectives is the view of the roles themselves. in
de   ning verb classes that capture argument structure similarities, levin (1993) does not
explicitly draw on the notion of semantic role, instead basing the classes on behavior
that is hypothesized to re   ect the properties of those roles. other work also eschews
the notion of a simple list of roles, instead postulating underlying semantic structure
that captures the relevant properties (levin and rappaport hovav 1998). interestingly,

147

computational linguistics

volume 34, number 2

as described in fillmore, ruppenhofer, and baker (2004), frame semantics also avoids a
prede   ned list of roles, but for different reasons. the set of semantic roles, called frame
elements, are chosen for each frame, rather than being selected from a prede   ned list
that may not capture the relevant distinctions in that particular situation. clearly, to
the extent that disagreement persists on semantic role lists and the nature of the roles
themselves, srl may be working on a shifting target.

these approaches also differ in the broad characterization of event participants
(and their roles) as more or less essential to the predicate. in the more syntactic-oriented
approaches, roles are typically divided into two categories: arguments, which cap-
ture a core relation, and adjuncts, which are less central. in frame semantics, the roles
are divided into core frame elements (e.g., suspect, authorities, offense) and periph-
eral or extra-thematic elements (e.g., manner, time, place). these distinctions carry
over into srl, where we see that systems generally perform better on the more central
arguments.

finally, although predicates are typically expressed as verbs, and thus much work
in both linguistics and srl focuses on them, some nouns and adjectives may be used
predicatively, assigning their own roles to entities (as in the adjective phrase proud that
we    nished the paper, where the subordinate clause is a theme argument of the adjective
proud). frame semantics tends to include in a frame relevant non-verb lexical items,
due to the emphasis on a common situation semantics. in contrast, the morphosyntactic
approaches have focused on de   ning classes of verbs only, because they depend on
common syntactic behavior that may not be apparent across syntactic categories.

interestingly, prepositions have a somewhat dual status with regard to role labeling.
in languages like english, prepositions serve an important function in signaling the rela-
tion of a participant to a verb. for example, it is widely accepted that to in give the book to
mary serves as a grammatical indicator of the recipient role assigned by the verb, rather
than as a role assigner itself. in other situations, however, a preposition can be viewed
as a role-assigning predicate in its own right. although some work in computational
linguistics is tackling the issue of the appropriate characterization of prepositions and
their contribution to semantic role assignment (as we see subsequently), much work
remains in order to fully integrate linguistic theories of prepositional function and
semantics into srl.

3. from linguistic theory to computational resources

the linguistic approaches to semantic roles discussed previously have greatly in   u-
enced current work on srl, leading to the creation of signi   cant computational lexicons
capturing the foundational properties of predicate   argument relations.

in the framenet project (fillmore, ruppenhofer, and baker 2004), lexicographers
de   ne a frame to capture some semantic situation (e.g., arrest), identify lexical items
as belonging to the frame (e.g., apprehend and bust), and devise appropriate roles for
the frame (e.g., suspect, authorities, offense). they then select and annotate example
sentences from the british national corpus and other sources to illustrate the range of
possible assignments of roles to sentence constituents for each lexical item (at present,
over 141,000 sentences have been annotated).

framenet thus consists of both a computational lexicon and a role-annotated cor-
pus. the existence of such a corpus enabled gildea and jurafsky (2002) to develop the
   rst statistical machine learning approach to srl, using various lexical and syntactic
features such as phrase type and grammatical function calculated over the annotated
constituents. although this research spurred the current wave of srl work that has

148

m`arquez, carreras, litkowski, and stevenson

id14

re   ned and extended gildea and jurafsky   s approach, the framenet data has not been
used extensively. one issue is that the corpus is not a representative sample of the
language, but rather consists of sentences chosen manually to illustrate the possible
role assignments for a given lexical item. another issue is that the semantic roles are
situation-speci   c, rather than general roles like agent, theme, and location that can be
used across many situations and genres.

the computational verb lexicon, verbnet (kipper, dang, and palmer 2000), instead
builds on levin   s (1993) work on de   ning verb classes according to shared argument re-
alization patterns. verbnet regularizes and extends the original levin classes; moreover,
each class is explicitly associated with argument realization speci   cations that state the
constituents that a verb can occur with and the role assigned to each. the roles are
mostly drawn from a small set (around 25) of general roles widely used in linguistic
theory. this lexicon has been an important resource in computational linguistics, but
because of the lack of an associated role-annotated corpus, it has only been used directly
in srl in an unsupervised setting (swier and stevenson 2004).

research on verbnet inspired the development of the proposition bank (propbank;
palmer, gildea, and kingsbury 2005), which has emerged as a primary resource for
research in srl (and used in four of the articles in this special issue). propbank ad-
dresses some of the issues for srl posed by the framenet data. first, the propbank
project has annotated the semantic roles for all verbs in the id32 corpus (the
wall street journal [wsj] news corpus). this provides a representative sample of text
with role-annotations, in contrast to framenet   s reliance on manually selected, illus-
trative sentences. importantly, propbank   s composition allows for consideration of the
statistical patterns across natural text. although there is some concern about the limited
genre of its newspaper text, this aspect has the advantage of allowing srl systems to
bene   t from the state-of-the-art syntactic parsers and other resources developed with
the wsj treebank data. moreover, current work is extending the propbank annotation
to balanced corpora such as the brown corpus.

the lexical information associated with verbs in propbank also differs signi   cantly
from the situation-speci   c roles of framenet. at the same time, the propbank designers
recognize the dif   culty of providing a small, prede   ned list of semantic roles that is suf-
   cient for all verbs and predicate   argument relations, as in verbnet. propbank instead
takes a    theory-neutral    approach to the designation of core semantic roles. each verb
has a frameset listing its allowed role labelings in which the arguments are designated
by number (starting from 0). each numbered argument is provided with an english-
language description speci   c to that verb. participants typically considered as adjuncts
are given named argument roles, because there is more general agreement on such
modi   ers as temporal or manner applying consistently across verbs. different senses
for a polysemous verb have different framesets; however, syntactic alternations which
preserve meaning (as identi   ed in levin [1993]) are considered to be a single frameset.
while the designations of arg0 and arg1 are intended to indicate the general roles of
agent and theme/patient across verbs, other argument numbers do not consistently
correspond to general (non-verb-speci   c) semantic roles.

given the variability in the sets of roles used across the computational resources,
an important issue is the extent to which different role sets affect the srl task, as well
as subsequent use of the output in other nlp applications. gildea and jurafsky (2002)
initiated this type of investigation by exploring whether their results were dependent
on the set of semantic roles they used. to this end, they mapped the framenet frame
elements into a set of abstract thematic roles (i.e., more general roles such as agent,
theme, location), and concluded that their system could use these thematic roles

149

computational linguistics

volume 34, number 2

without degradation. similar questions must be investigated in the context of propbank,
where the framesets for the verbs may have signi   cant domain-speci   c meanings and
arguments due to the dependence of the project on wsj data. given the uncertainty in
the linguistic status of semantic role lists, and the lack of evidence about which types
of roles would be most useful in various nlp tasks, an important ongoing focus of
attention is the value of mapping between the role sets of the different resources (swier
and stevenson 2005; loper, yi, and palmer 2007; yi, loper, and palmer 2007).

we noted previously the somewhat special part that prepositions play in marking
semantic relations, in some sense mediating the role assignment of a verb to an argu-
ment. the resources noted earlier differ in their treatment of prepositions. in verbnet,
for example, prepositions are listed explicitly as part of the syntactic context in which
a role is assigned (e.g., agent v prep(for) recipient), but it is the np object of the prep-
osition that receives the semantic role. in framenet and propbank, on the other hand,
the full prepositional phrase is considered as the frame element (the constituent re-
ceiving the role). clearly, further work needs to proceed on how to best capture the in-
teraction between verbs and prepositions in srl. this is especially complex given
the high polysemy of prepositions, and work has proceeded on relating preposition
disambiguation to role assignment (e.g., o   hara and wiebe 2003). for such approaches
to make meaningful progress, resources are needed that elaborate the senses of prepo-
sitions and relate those senses to semantic roles. in the preposition project (tpp;
litkowski and hargraves 2005), a comprehensive, hierarchical characterization of the
semantic roles for all preposition senses in english is being developed. tpp has sense-
tagged more than 25,000 preposition instances in framenet sentences, allowing for
comprehensive investigation of the linking between preposition sense and semantic role
assignment.

4. approaches to automatic srl

the work on srl has included a broad spectrum of probabilistic and machine-learning
approaches to the task. we focus here on supervised systems, because most srl research
takes an approach requiring training on role-annotated data. we brie   y survey the main
approaches to automatic srl, and the types of learning features used.

4.1 srl step by step

given a sentence and a designated verb, the srl task consists of identifying the bound-
aries of the arguments of the verb predicate (argument identi   cation) and labeling
them with semantic roles (argument classi   cation). the most common architecture for
automatic srl consists of the following steps to achieve these subtasks.

the    rst step in srl typically consists of    ltering (or pruning) the set of argu-
ment candidates for a given predicate. because arguments may be a continuous or
discontinuous sequence of words, any subsequence of words in the sentence is an
argument candidate. exhaustive exploration of this space of candidates is not feasible,
because it is both very large and imbalanced (i.e., the vast majority of candidates are
not actual arguments of the verb). the simple heuristic rules of xue and palmer (2004)
are commonly used to perform    ltering because they greatly reduce the set of candidate
arguments, while maintaining a very high recall.

the second step consists of a local scoring of argument candidates by means of
a function that outputs probabilities (or con   dence scores) for each of the possible

150

m`arquez, carreras, litkowski, and stevenson

id14

role labels, plus an extra    no-argument    label indicating that the candidate should
not be considered an argument in the solution. in this step, candidates are usually
treated independently of each other. a crucial aspect in local scoring (see section 4.2)
is the representation of candidates with features, rather than the particular choice of
classi   cation algorithm.

argument identi   cation and classi   cation may be treated jointly or separately in
the local scoring step. in the latter case, a pipeline of two subprocesses is typically
applied,    rst scoring between    argument    and    no-argument    labels, and then scoring
the particular argument labels. because argument identi   cation is closely related to
syntax and argument classi   cation is more a semantic issue, useful features for the two
subtasks may be very different   that is, a good feature for addressing recognition may
hurt classi   cation and vice versa (pradhan et al. 2005a).

the third step in srl is to apply a joint scoring (or global scoring) in order to
combine the predictions of local scorers to produce a good structure of labeled argu-
ments for the predicate. in this step, dependencies among several arguments of the same
predicate can be exploited. for instance, punyakanok, roth, and yih (this issue) ensure
that a labeling satis   es a set of structural and srl-dependent constraints (arguments
do not overlap, core arguments do not repeat, etc.). also in this issue, toutanova,
haghighi, and manning apply re-ranking to select the best among a set of candidate
complete solutions produced by a base srl system. finally, probabilistic models have
also been applied to produce the structured output, for example, generative models
(thompson, levy, and manning 2003), sequence tagging with classi   ers (m`arquez et al.
2005; pradhan et al. 2005b), and id49 on tree structures (cohn
and blunsom 2005). these approaches at a global level may demand considerable extra
computation, but current optimization techniques help solve them quite ef   ciently.

some variations in the three-step architecture are found. systems may bypass one
of the steps, by doing only local scoring, or skipping directly to joint scoring. a fourth
step may consist of    xing common errors or enforcing coherence in the    nal solution.
this postprocess usually consists of a set of hand-developed heuristic rules that are
dependent on a particular architecture and corpus of application.

an important consideration within this general srl architecture is the combination
of systems and input annotations. most srl systems include some kind of combi-
nation to increase robustness, gain coverage, and reduce effects of parse errors. one
may combine: (1) the output of several independent srl basic systems (surdeanu
et al. 2007; pradhan et al. 2005b), or (2) several outputs from the same srl system
obtained by changing input annotations or other internal parameters (koomen et al.
2005; toutanova, haghighi, and manning 2005). the combination can be as simple as
selecting the best among the set of complete candidate solutions, but usually consists of
combining fragments of alternative solutions to construct the    nal output. finally, the
combination component may involve machine learning or not. the gain in performance
from the combination step is consistently between two and three f1 points. however, a
combination approach increases system complexity and penalizes ef   ciency.

several exceptions to this described architecture for srl can be found in the lit-
erature. one approach entails joint labeling of all predicates of the sentence, instead
of proceeding one by one. this opens the possibility of exploiting dependencies among
the different verbs in the sentence. however, the complexity may grow signi   cantly, and
results so far are inconclusive (carreras, m`arquez, and chrupa  a 2004; surdeanu et al.
2007). other promising approaches draw on id33 rather than traditional
phrase structure parsing (johansson and nugues 2007), or combine parsing and srl
into a single step of id29 (musillo and merlo 2006).

151

computational linguistics

volume 34, number 2

4.2 feature engineering

as previously noted, devising the features with which to encode candidate arguments
is crucial for obtaining good results in the srl task. given a verb and a candidate argu-
ment (a syntactic phrase) to be classi   ed in the local scoring step, three types of features
are typically used: (1) features that characterize the candidate argument and its context;
(2) features that characterize the verb predicate and its context; and (3) features that cap-
ture the relation (either syntactic or semantic) between the candidate and the predicate.
gildea and jurafsky (2002) presented a compact set of features across these three
types, which has served as the core of most of the subsequent srl work: (1) the phrase
type, headword, and governing category of the constituent; (2) the lemma, voice, and
subcategorization pattern of the verb; and (3) the left/right position of the constituent
with respect to the verb, and the category path between them. extensions to these fea-
tures have been proposed in various directions. exploiting the ability of some machine
learning algorithms to work with very large feature spaces, some authors have largely
extended the representation of the constituent and its context, including among others:
   rst and last words (and part-of-speech) in the constituent, bag-of-words, id165s of
part of speech, and sequence of top syntactic elements in the constituent. parent and
sibling constituents in the tree may also be codi   ed with all the previous structural and
lexical features (pradhan et al. 2005a; surdeanu et al. 2007). other authors have designed
new features with speci   c linguistic motivations. for instance, surdeanu et al. (2003)
generalized the concept of headword with the content word feature. they also used
named entity labels as features. xue and palmer (2004) presented the syntactic frame
feature, which captures the overall sentence structure using the verb predicate and the
constituent as pivots. all these features resulted in a signi   cant increase in performance.
finally, regarding the relation between the constituent and the predicate, several
variants of gildea and jurafsky   s syntactic path have been proposed in the literature
(e.g., generalizations to avoid sparsity, and adaptations to partial parsing). also, some
attempts have been made at characterizing the semantic relation between the predicate
and the constituent. in zapirain, agirre, and m`arquez (2007) and erk (2007), selectional
preferences between predicate and headword of the constituent are explored to generate
semantic compatibility features. using conjunctions of several of the basic features is
also common practice. this may be very relevant when the machine learning method
used is linear in the space of features.

joint scoring and combination components open the door to richer types of fea-
tures, which may take into account global properties of the candidate solution plus de-
pendencies among the different arguments. the most remarkable work in this direction
is the reranking approach by toutanova, haghighi, and manning in this issue. when
training the ranker to select the best candidate solution they codify pattern features as
strings containing the whole argument structure of the candidate. several variations
of this type of feature (with different degrees of generalization to avoid sparseness)
allow them to signi   cantly increase the performance of the base system. also related,
pradhan et al. (2005b) and surdeanu et al. (2007) convert the con   dence scores of several
base srl systems into features for training a    nal machine learning   based combination
system. surdeanu et al. (2007) develop a broad spectrum of features, with sentence-
based information, describing the role played by the candidate argument in every
solution proposed by the different base srl systems.

a completely different approach to feature engineering is the use of kernel meth-
ods to implicitly exploit all kinds of substructures in the syntactic representation of
the candidates. this knowledge poor approach intends to take advantage of a massive

152

m`arquez, carreras, litkowski, and stevenson

id14

quantity of features without the need for manual engineering of specialized features.
this motivation might be relevant for fast system development and porting, especially
when specialized linguistic knowledge of the language of application is not available.
the most studied approach consists of using some variants of the    all subtrees kernel   
applied to the sentence parse trees. the work by moschitti, pighin, and basili in this
issue is the main representative of this family.

5. empirical evaluations of srl systems

many experimental studies have been conducted since the work of gildea and jurafsky
(2002), including seven international evaluation tasks in acl-related conferences and
workshops: the signll conll shared tasks in 2004 and 2005 (carreras and m`arquez
2004, 2005), the siglex senseval-3 in 2004 (litkowski 2004), and four tasks in the
siglex semeval in 2007 (pradhan et al. 2007; m`arquez et al. 2007; baker, ellsworth, and
erk 2007; litkowski and hargraves 2007). in the subsequent sections, we summarize
their main features, results, and conclusions, although note that the scores are not
directly comparable across different exercises, due to differences in scoring and in the
experimental methodologies.

5.1 task de   nition and id74

the standard experiment in automatic srl can be de   ned as follows: given a sentence
and a target predicate appearing in it,    nd the arguments of the predicate and label
them with semantic roles. a system is evaluated in terms of precision, recall, and f1 of
the labeled arguments. in evaluating a system, an argument is considered correct when
both its boundaries and the semantic role label match a gold standard. performance
can be divided into two components: (1) the precision, recall, and f1 of unlabeled
arguments, measuring the accuracy of the system at segmenting the sentence; and (2)
the classi   cation accuracy of assigning semantic roles to the arguments that have been
correctly identi   ed. in calculating the metrics, the de facto standard is to give credit only
when a proposed argument perfectly matches an argument in the reference solution;
nonetheless, variants that give some credit for partial matching also exist.

5.2 shared task experiments using framenet, propbank, and verbnet

to date, most experimental work has made use of english data annotated either with
propbank or framenet semantic roles.

the conll shared tasks in 2004 and 2005 were based on propbank (carreras and
m`arquez 2004, 2005), which is the largest evaluation benchmark available today, and
also the most used by researchers   all articles in this special issue dealing with english
use this benchmark. in the evaluation, the best systems obtained an f1 score of    80%,
and have achieved only minimal improvements since then. the articles in this issue by
punyakanok, roth, and yih; toutanova, haghighi, and manning; and pradhan, ward,
and martin describe such efforts. an analysis of the outputs in conll-2005 showed
that argument identi   cation accounts for most of the errors: a system will recall    81%
of the correct unlabeled arguments, and    95% of those will be assigned the correct
semantic role. the analysis also showed that systems recognized core arguments better
than adjuncts (with f1 scores from the high 60s to the high 80s for the former, but below
60% for the latter). finally, it was also observed that, although systems performed better

153

computational linguistics

volume 34, number 2

on verbs appearing frequently in training, the best systems could recognize arguments
of unseen verbs with an f1 in the low 70s, not far from the overall performance.1

semeval-2007 included a task on semantic evaluation for english, combining word
sense disambiguation and srl based on propbank (pradhan et al. 2007). unlike the
conll tasks, this task concentrated on 50 selected verbs. interestingly, the data was
annotated using verb-independent roles using the propbank/verbnet mapping from
yi, loper, and palmer (2007). the two participating systems could predict verbnet roles
as accurately as propbank verb-dependent roles.

experiments based on framenet usually concentrate on a selected list of frames.
in senseval-3, 40 frames were selected for an srl task with the goal of replicating
gildea and jurafsky (2002) and improving on them (litkowski 2004). participants were
evaluated on assigning semantic roles to given arguments, with best f1 of 92%, and on
the task of segmenting and labeling arguments, with best f1 of 83%.

semeval-2007 also included an srl task based on framenet (baker, ellsworth, and
erk 2007). it was much more complete, realistic, and dif   cult than its predecessor in
senseval-3. the goal was to perform complete analysis of semantic roles on unseen
texts,    rst determining the appropriate frames of predicates, and then determining their
arguments labeled with semantic roles. it also involved creating a graph of the sentence
representing part of its semantics, by means of frames and labeled arguments. the
test data of this task consisted of novel manually-annotated documents, containing a
number of frames and roles not in the framenet lexicon. three teams submitted results,
with precision percentages in the 60s, but recall percentages only in the 30s.

to our knowledge, there is no evidence to date on the relative dif   culty of assigning

framenet or propbank roles.

5.3 impact of syntactic processing in srl

semantic roles are closely related to syntax, and, therefore, automatic srl heavily relies
on the syntactic structure of the sentence. in propbank, over 95% of the arguments
match with a single constituent of the parse tree. if the output produced by a statistical
parser is used (e.g., collins   s or charniak   s) the exact matching is still over 90%. more-
over, some simple rules can be used to join constituents and    x a considerable portion
of the mismatches (toutanova, haghighi, and manning 2005). thus, it has become a
common practice to use full parse trees as the main source for solving srl.

the joint model presented in this issue by toutanova, haghighi, and manning
obtains an f1 at    90% on the wsj test of the conll-2005 evaluation when using gold-
standard trees; but with automatic syntactic analysis, its best result falls to    80%. this
and other work consistently show that the drop in performance occurs in identifying
argument boundaries; when arguments are identi   ed correctly with predicted parses,
the accuracy of assigning semantic roles is similar to that with correct parses.

a relevant question that has been addressed in experimental work concerns the
use of a partial parser instead of a parser that produces full wsj trees. in the conll-
2004 task, systems were restricted to the use of base syntactic phrases (i.e., chunks)
and clauses, and the best results that could be obtained were just below 70%. but the
training set in that evaluation was about    ve times smaller than that of the 2005 task.
punyakanok, roth, and yih (this issue) and surdeanu et al. (2007) have shown that, in

1 the analysis summarized here was presented in the oral session at conll-2005. the slides of the session,

containing the results supporting this analysis, are available in the conll-2005 shared task web site.

154

m`arquez, carreras, litkowski, and stevenson

id14

fact, a system working with partial parsing can do almost as well as a system working
with full parses, with differences in f1 of only    2   3 points.
currently, the top-performing systems on the conll data make use of several
outputs of syntactic parsers, as discussed in section 4. it is clear that many errors in
srl are caused by having incorrect syntactic constituents, as reported by punyakanok,
roth, and yih in this issue. by using many parses, the recognition of semantic roles is
more robust to parsing errors. yet, it remains unanswered what is the most appropriate
level of syntactic analysis needed in srl.

5.4 generalization of srl systems to new domains

porting a system to a new domain, different than the domain used to develop and train
the system, is a challenging question in nlp. srl is no exception, with the particular
dif   culty that a predicate in a new domain may exhibit a behavior not contemplated
in the dictionary of frames at training time. this dif   culty was identi   ed as a major
challenge in the framenet-based task in semeval-2007 (baker, ellsworth, and erk 2007).
in the conll-2005 task, wsj-trained systems were tested on three sections of
the brown corpus annotated by the propbank team. the performance of all systems
dropped dramatically: the best systems scored f1 below 70%, as opposed to    gures at
   80% when testing on wsj data. this is perhaps not surprising, taking into account that
the pre-processing systems involved in the analysis (tagger and parser) also experienced
a signi   cant drop in performance. the article in this issue by pradhan, ward, and
martin further investigates the robustness across text genres when porting a system
from wsj to brown. importantly, the authors claim that the loss in accuracy takes place
in assigning the semantic roles, rather than in the identi   cation of argument boundaries.

5.5 srl on languages other than english

semeval-2007 featured the    rst evaluation exercise of srl systems for languages other
than english, namely for spanish and catalan (m`arquez et al. 2007). the data was part
of the cess-ece corpus, consisting of    100k tokens for each language. the semantic
role annotations are similar to propbank, in that role labels are speci   c to each verb,
but also include a verb-independent thematic role label similar to the scheme proposed
in verbnet. the task consisted of assigning semantic class labels to target verbs, and
identifying and labeling arguments of such verbs, in both cases using gold-standard
syntax. only two teams participated, with best results at    86% for disambiguating
predicates, and at    83% for labeling arguments.
the work by xue in this issue studies id14 for chinese, using the
chinese propbank and nombank corpora. apart from working also with nominalized
predicates, this work constitutes the    rst comprehensive study on srl for a language
different from english.

5.6 srl with other parts-of-speech

the semeval-2007 task on disambiguating prepositions (litkowski and hargraves 2007)
used framenet sentences as the training and test data, with over 25,000 sentences for
the 34 most common english prepositions. although not overtly de   ned as semantic
role labeling, each instance was characterized with a semantic role name and also had
an associated framenet frame element. almost 80% of the prepositional phrases in the
instances were identi   ed as core frame elements, and are likely to be closely associated

155

computational linguistics

volume 34, number 2

with arguments of the words to which they are attached. the three participants used a
variety of methods, with the top performing team using machine learning techniques
similar to those in other id14 tasks.

6. final remarks

to date, srl systems have been shown to perform reasonably well in some controlled
experiments, with f1 measures in the low 80s on standard test collections for english.
still, a number of important challenges exist for future research on srl. it remains
unclear what is the appropriate level of syntax needed to support robust analysis of
semantic roles, and to what degree improved performance in srl is constrained by the
state-of-the-art in tagging and parsing. beyond syntax, the relation of semantic roles to
other semantic knowledge (such as id138, named entities, or even a catalogue of
frames) has scarcely been addressed in the design of current srl models. a deeper
understanding of these questions could help in developing methods that yield im-
proved generalization, and that are less dependent on large quantities of role-annotated
training data.

indeed, the requirement of most srl approaches for such training data, which is
both dif   cult and highly expensive to produce, is the major obstacle to the widespread
application of srl across different genres and different languages. given the degrada-
tion of performance when a supervised system is faced with unseen events or a testing
corpus different from training, this is a major impediment to increasing the application
of srl even within english, a language for which two major annotated corpora are
available. it is critical for the future of srl that research broadens to include wider
investigation of unsupervised and minimally supervised learning methods.

in addition to these open research problems, there are also methodological issues
that need to be addressed regarding how research is conducted and evaluated. shared
task frameworks have been crucial in srl development by supporting explicit compar-
isons of approaches, but such benchmark testing can also overly focus research efforts
on small improvements in particular evaluation measures. improving the entire srl
approach in a signi   cant way may require more open-ended investigation and more
qualitative analysis.

acknowledgments
we are grateful for the insightful comments
of two anonymous reviewers whose input
helped us to improve the article. this work
was supported by the spanish ministry of
education and science (m`arquez); the
catalan ministry of innovation, universities
and enterprise; and a grant from ntt, agmt.
dtd. 6/21/1998 (carreras); and nserc of
canada (stevenson).

references
baker, c., m. ellsworth, and k. erk. 2007.
semeval-2007 task 19: frame semantic
structure extraction. in proceedings of the
4th international workshop on semantic
evaluations (semeval-2007), pages 99   104,
prague, czech republic.

156

boas, h. c. 2002. bilingual framenet

dictionaries for machine translation.
in proceedings of the third international
conference on language resources and
evaluation (lrec), pages 1364   1371,
las palmas de gran canaria, spain.

briscoe, t. and j. carroll. 1997. automatic

extraction of subcategorization from
corpora. in proceedings of the 5th acl
conference on applied natural language
processing (anlp), pages 356   363,
washington, dc.

carreras, x. and l. m`arquez. 2004.

introduction to the conll-2004 shared
task: id14. in proceedings
of the eighth conference on computational
natural language learning (conll-2004),
pages 89   97, boston, ma.

carreras, x. and l. m`arquez. 2005.

introduction to the conll-2005 shared

m`arquez, carreras, litkowski, and stevenson

id14

task: id14. in proceedings
of the ninth conference on computational
natural language learning (conll-2005),
pages 152   164, ann arbor, mi.

carreras, x., l. m`arquez, and g. chrupa  a.

2004. hierarchical recognition of
propositional arguments with id88s.
in proceedings of the eighth conference on
computational natural language learning
(conll-2004), pages 106   109, boston, ma.
cohn, t. and p. blunsom. 2005. semantic role

labelling with tree conditional random
   elds. in proceedings of the ninth conference
on computational natural language
learning (conll-2005), pages 169   172,
ann arbor, mi.

copestake, a. and d. flickinger. 2000. an

open-source grammar development
environment and broad-coverage english
grammar using hpsg. in proceedings
of the second international conference on
language resources and evaluation (lrec),
pages 591   600, athens, greece.

dowty, d. 1991. thematic proto-roles and

argument selection. language, 67:547   619.

erk, k. 2007. a simple, similarity-based
model for selectional preferences. in
proceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the
association of computational linguistics,
pages 216   223, prague, czech republic.

fillmore, c. 1968. the case for case. in

e. bach and r. t. harms, editors, universals
in linguistic theory. holt, rinehart &
winston, new york, pages 1   88.

fillmore, c. j. 1976. frame semantics and the
nature of language. annals of the new york
academy of sciences: conference on the origin
and development of language and speech,
280:20   32.

fillmore, c. j., j. ruppenhofer, and c. f.

baker. 2004. framenet and representing
the link between semantic and syntactic
relations. in churen huang and winfried
lenders, editors, frontiers in linguistics,
volume i of language and linguistics
monograph series b. institute of linguistics,
academia sinica, taipei, pages 19   59.

gildea, d. and d. jurafsky. 2002. automatic
labeling of semantic roles. computational
linguistics, 28(3):245   288.

grimshaw, j. 1990. argument structure. mit

press, cambridge, ma.

habash, n., b. j. dorr, and d. traum. 2003.
hybrid id86 from
lexical conceptual structures. machine
translation, 18(2):81   128.

hirst, g. 1987. semantic interpretation and
the resolution of ambiguity. cambridge
university press, cambridge.

jackendoff, r. 1990. semantic structures. mit

press, cambridge, ma.

johansson, r. and p. nugues. 2007. lth:

semantic structure extraction using
nonprojective dependency trees. in
proceedings of the 4th international
workshop on semantic evaluations
(semeval-2007), pages 227   230, prague,
czech republic.

kipper, k., h. t. dang, and m. palmer. 2000.
class-based construction of a verb lexicon.
in proceedings of the 17th national conference
on arti   cial intelligence (aaai-2000),
austin, tx.

koomen, p., v. punyakanok, d. roth, and

w. yih. 2005. generalized id136
with multiple id14
systems. in proceedings of the ninth
conference on computational natural
language learning (conll-2005),
pages 181   184, ann arbor, mi.

levin, b. 1993. english verb classes and

alternations: a preliminary investigation.
the university of chicago press,
chicago, il.

levin, b. and m. rappaport hovav. 1998.
building verb meanings. in m. butt and
w. geuder, editors, the projection of
arguments: lexical and compositional
factors. csli publications, stanford, ca,
pages 97   134.

levin, b. and m. rappaport hovav. 2005.

argument realization. cambridge
university press, cambridge.

litkowski, k. c. 2004. senseval-3 task:

automatic labeling of semantic roles. in
proceedings of the 3rd international workshop
on the evaluation of systems for the semantic
analysis of text (senseval-3), pages 9   12,
barcelona, spain.

litkowski, k. c. and o. hargraves. 2005.
the preposition project. in proceedings
of the acl-sigsem workshop on the
linguistic dimensions of prepositions and
their use in computational linguistic
formalisms and applications, pages 171   179,
colchester, uk.

litkowski, k. c. and o. hargraves. 2007.

semeval-2007 task 06: word-sense
disambiguation of prepositions. in
proceedings of the 4th international workshop
on semantic evaluations (semeval-2007),
pages 24   29, prague, czech republic.

loper, e., s. yi, and m. palmer. 2007.

combining lexical resources: mapping
between propbank and verbnet. in
proceedings of the 7th international workshop
on computational semantics, pages 118   128,
tilburg, the netherlands.

157

computational linguistics

volume 34, number 2

m`arquez, l., p. r. comas, j. gim  enez, and
n. catal`a. 2005. id14
as sequential tagging. in proceedings
of the ninth conference on computational
natural language learning (conll-2005),
pages 193   196, ann arbor, mi.

m`arquez, l., l. villarejo, m.a. mart    , and
m. taul  e. 2007. semeval-2007 task 09:
multilevel semantic annotation of catalan
and spanish. in proceedings of the 4th
international workshop on semantic
evaluations (semeval-2007), pages 42   47,
prague, czech republic.

melli, g., y. wang, y. liu, m. m. kashani,

z. shi, b. gu, a. sarkar, and f. popowich.
2005. description of squash, the sfu
id53 summary handler
for the duc-2005 summarization task.
in proceedings of the hlt/emnlp
document understanding workshop (duc),
vancouver, canada, available at
http://duc.nist.gov/pubs/2005papers/
simonfraseru.sarkar.pdf.

merlo, p. and s. stevenson. 2001. automatic

verb classi   cation based on statistical
distributions of argument structure.
computational linguistics, 27(3):373   408.

meyers, a., r. reeves, c. macleod,

r. szekely, v. zielinska, b. young, and
r. grishman. 2004. the nombank project:
an interim report. in proceedings of
the hlt-naacl 2004 workshop: frontiers
in corpus annotation, pages 24   31,
boston, ma.

moldovan, d., a. badulescu, m. tatu,

d. antohe, and r. girju. 2004. models for
the semantic classi   cation of noun
phrases. in proceedings of the hlt-naacl
2004 workshop on computational lexical
semantics, pages 60   67, boston, ma.

musillo, g. and p. merlo. 2006. accurate

parsing of the proposition bank. in
proceedings of the human language
technology conference of the naacl,
pages 101   104, new york, ny.

narayanan, s. and s. harabagiu. 2004.

id53 based on semantic
structures. in proceedings of the 20th
international conference on computational
linguistics (coling), pages 693   701,
geneva, switzerland.

o   hara, t. and j. wiebe. 2003. preposition

semantic classi   cation via id32
and framenet. in proceedings of the
seventh conference on computational
natural language learning (conll-2003),
pages 79   86, edmonton, canada.

palmer, m., d. gildea, and p. kingsbury.

2005. the proposition bank: an annotated

158

corpus of semantic roles. computational
linguistics, 31(1):71   105.

pradhan, s., k. hacioglu, v. krugler,

w. ward, j. martin, and d. jurafsky. 2005a.
support vector learning for semantic
argument classi   cation. machine learning,
60(1):11   39.

pradhan, s., k. hacioglu, w. ward, j. h.

martin, and d. jurafsky. 2005b. semantic
role chunking combining complementary
syntactic views. in proceedings of the
ninth conference on computational
natural language learning (conll-2005),
pages 217   220, ann arbor, mi.

pradhan, s., e. loper, d. dligach, and

m. palmer. 2007. semeval-2007 task 17:
english lexical sample, srl and all words.
in proceedings of the 4th international
workshop on semantic evaluations
(semeval-2007), pages 87   92, prague,
czech republic.

pustejovsky, j. 1995. the generative lexicon.

mit press, cambridge, ma.

rosario, b. and m. hearst. 2004. classifying

semantic relations in bioscience text. in
proceedings of the 42nd annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics,
pages 430   437, barcelona, spain.

schulte im walde, s. 2006. experiments
on the automatic induction of german
semantic verb classes. computational
linguistics, 32(2):159   194.

shi, l. and r. mihalcea. 2005. putting pieces
together: combining framenet, verbnet
and id138 for robust id29.
in computational linguistics and intelligent
text processing; sixth international
conference, cicling 2005, proceedings,
lncs, vol 3406, pages 100   111, mexico
city, mexico.

surdeanu, m., s. harabagiu, j. williams,

and p. aarseth. 2003. using
predicate-argument structures for
information extraction. in proceedings of the
41st annual meeting of the association for
computational linguistics, pages 8   15,
sapporo, japan.

surdeanu, m., l. m`arquez, x. carreras, and
p. r. comas. 2007. combination strategies
for id14. journal of
arti   cial intelligence research (jair),
29:105   151.

swier, r. and s. stevenson. 2004.

unsupervised semantic role labelling. in
proceedings of the conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing
(emnlp), pages 95   102, barcelona, spain.
swier, r. and s. stevenson. 2005. exploiting
a verb lexicon in automatic semantic role

m`arquez, carreras, litkowski, and stevenson

id14

labelling. in proceedings of the human
language technology conference and
conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing (hlt/emlnp), pages
883   890, vancouver, b.c., canada.

thompson, c. a., r. levy, and c. manning.

2003. a generative model for semantic role
labeling. in proceedings of the 14th european
conference on machine learning (ecml),
pages 397   408, dubrovnik, croatia.

toutanova, k., a. haghighi, and c. manning.
2005. joint learning improves semantic role
labeling. in proceedings of the 43rd annual
meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, pages 589   596, ann arbor, mi.

xue, n. and m. palmer. 2004. calibrating

features for id14. in

proceedings of the conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing
(emnlp), pages 88   94, barcelona, spain.

yi, s., e. loper, and m. palmer. 2007. can

semantic roles generalize across corpora?
in human language technologies 2007:
the conference of the north american
chapter of the association for computational
linguistics; proceedings of the main
conference, pages 548   555, rochester, ny.

zapirain, b., e. agirre, and l. m`arquez. 2007.

ubc-upc: sequential srl using
selectional preferences: an approach with
maximum id178 markov models. in
proceedings of the 4th international workshop
on semantic evaluations (semeval-2007),
pages 354   357, prague, czech republic.

159

