nlp
introduction to nlp
id53
siri
ask jeeves (ask.com)
wolframalpha
ibm   s watson
http://www.geekwire.com/2013/ibm-takes-watson-cloud/ 
watson on jeopardy
sample questions
on december 8, 2008 this national newspaper raised its newsstand pice by 25 cents to $1
usa today
in 2010 this former first lady published the memoir "spoken from the heart   
laura bush
this person is appointed by a testator to carry out the directions & requests in his will
executor
familiarity is said to breed this, from the latin for "despise   
contempt
as of 2010, croatia & macedonia are candidates but this is the only former yugoslav republic in the eu
slovenia
the ancient "lion of nimrud" went missing from this city's national museum in 2003 (along with a lot of other stuff)
baghdad
it's just a bloody nose! you don't have this hereditary disorder once endemic to european royalty
haemophilia
it's michelangelo's fresco on the wall of the sistine chapel, depicting the saved and the damned
the last judgement
she "died in the church and was buried along with her name. nobody came   
eleanor rigby
a camel is a horse designed by this
committee

watson videos
ibm's watson supercomputer destroys humans in jeopardy | engadget 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wfr3lom_xhe
"what is ibm watson?" 7 videos from the jeopardy! era
http://mentalfloss.com/article/51543/what-ibm-watson-7-videos-jeopardy-era 
people ask questions online
excite corpus
2,477,283 queries (one day   s worth)
8.4% of them are questions
43.9% factual (what is the country code for belgium)
56.1% procedural (how do i get out of debt) or other


the excite corpus
in what year did baseball become an offical sport?
how do i get out of debt?
where can i found out how to pass a drug test?
when is the super bowl?
who is california's district state senator?
where can i buy extra nibs for a foutain pen?
what time is it in west samoa?
where can i buy a little kitty cat?
what are the symptoms of attention deficit disorder?
where can i get some information on michael jordan?
how does the character seyavash in ferdowsi's shahnameh exhibit characteristics of a hero?
when did the neanderthal man live?
which frenchman declined the nobel prize for literature for ideological reasons?

murax questions
what u.s. city is at the junction of the allegheny and monongahela rivers?
who wrote    across the river and into the trees    ?
who married actress nancy davis?
what   s the capital of the netherlands?
who was the last of the apache warrior chiefs?
what chief justice headed the commission that declared:    lee harvey oswald . . . acted alone.   ?
what famed falls are split in two by goat island?
what is november   s birthstone?
who   s won the most oscars for costume design?
what is the state flower of alaska?

julian kupiec 1993. murax: a robust linguistic approach for id53
aol corpus questions
what does cerebral cortical atrophy mean 
what fraction is closest to pi
what is the highest calories consumed by a person in a 24 hor period
what happens to limewater in the presence of carbon dioxide
what language is numa numa in
who discovered saturn
who discovered the gene for huntington's disease
who is the daugther of indian sitar maestro ravi shankar
who invented marshmallow sandwich cookies
who invented lithograph
who was the first michigan football player to put on the cover of a video game
who invented smallpox vaccine
when was the berlin wall torn down
when was yahoo launched
when was the wedding march by mendelssohn composed
when was the declaration of independence signed
when did france become a republic
when was alexander the great born
which fish contains low mercury
when is the youngest a minor can move out of thier parents house in texas
when should take a child to see an psychologist
what hormone imbalance could mimic pregnancy symptoms
question type taxonomy
question types
yes/no vs. wh-
factual vs. procedural
single answer vs. multiple answers
objective vs. subjective
context-specific (personalized) vs. generic
known answer in the collection, y/n
state of the art
question types
mostly factual, short-answer questions
system architecture
ir component
statistical approaches using lots of data
relatively little knowledge
older systems (pre-trec)
baseball (green et al., 1961)
baseball
eliza (weizenbaum 1966)
dialogue, therapist
shrdlu (winograd 1972)
blocks world
lunar (woods, 1973)
lunar rocks
murax (kupiec 1993)
open-domain, encyclopedia-based
start (katz 1997)
open-domain, web-based
deep red (hirschman & al. 1999)
reading comprehension
jupiter (zue et al., 2000)
spoken questions

eliza (weizenbaum 1966)
eliza plays a therapist
and doesn   t really answer questions    
simple pattern matching
sample dialogue
e: i am the psychotherapist.  please, describe your problems.
p: i am always tired.
e: why do you say you are always tired?
p: because i cannot sleep.
e: is it because you cannot sleep that you came to me?
p: yes, help me please.
e: earlier you said you cannot sleep?

lunar (woods et al., 1972)
lunar sciences natural language information system
apollo 11 moon rocks
questions in english
components
a general-purpose atn (augmented transition network) grammar for english
a procedural-semantics framework for semantic interpretation
mapping from the syntactic grammar to a logic representation
3,500 word dictionary
13,000 entries in the knowledge base
lunar answered 78% of sentences asked by geologists at 1971 lunar rocks conference
how many breccias contain olivine?
what are they?

lunar grammar fragment
shrdlu (winograd 1972)
simple questions about the blocks world
person: pick up a big red block. 
computer: ok. 
person: grasp the pyramid. 
computer: i don't understand which pyramid you mean. 
person (changing their mind): find a block which is taller than the one you are holding 
and put it into the box. 
computer: by "it", i assume you mean the block which is taller than the one i am holding. 
computer: ok. 
person: what does the box contain? 
computer: the blue pyramid and the blue block. 
person: what is the pyramid supported by? 
computer: the box. 
person: how many blocks are not in the box? 
computer: four of them. 
person: is at least one of them narrower than the one which i told you to pick up? 
computer: yes, the red cube.
http://hci.stanford.edu/~winograd/shrdlu/
start (katz 1997)
http://start.csail.mit.edu
open-domain
uses the web
online since 1993

nlp
