nlp
introduction to nlp
id11
id11
removing some parts of sentences
quotes
appositions
adjectives and adverbs
embedded clauses
attribution clauses
applications
subtitling
headline generation
mobile devices
applications for the visually impaired

knight and marcu 2002
use structured (syntactic) information
two approaches
noisy channel
decision based

knight and marcu 2002
the documentation is typical of epson quality; excellent.
documentation is excellent.
all of our design goals were achieved and the delivered performance matches the speed of the underlying device.  
all design goals were achieved.
although the modules themselves may be physically and/or electronically incompatible, the cable-specific jacks on them provide industry-standard connections.  
cable-specific jacks provide industry-standard connections.
beyond the basic level, the operations of the three products vary widely.
the operations of the three products vary widely.
arborscan is reliable and worked accurately in testing, but it produces very large dxf files. 
arborscan produces very large dxf files.  
many debugging features, including user-defined break points and variable-watching and message-watching windows, have been added.
many debugging features have been added. 
english wikipedia
anthony charles lynton blair (born 6 may 1953)[1] is a former british labour party politician who served as the prime minister of the united kingdom from 2 may 1997 to 27 june 2007. he was the member of parliament (mp) for sedgefield from 1983 to 2007 and leader of the labour party from 1994 to 2007. he resigned from all of these positions in june 2007.
tony blair was elected leader of the labour party in the leadership election of july 1994, following the sudden death of his predecessor, john smith. under his leadership, the party adopted the term "new labour"[2] and moved away from its traditional left wing position towards the centre ground.[3][4] blair subsequently led labour to a landslide victory in the 1997 general election. at 43 years old, he became the youngest prime minister since lord liverpool in 1812. in the first years of the new labour government, blair's government implemented a number of 1997 manifesto pledges, introducing the minimum wage, human rights act and freedom of information act, and carrying out regional devolution, establishing the scottish parliament, the national assembly for wales, and the northern ireland assembly.
blair's role as prime minister was particularly visible in foreign and security policy, including in northern ireland, where he was involved in the 1998 good friday agreement. from the start of the war on terror in 2001, blair strongly supported the foreign policy of us president george w. bush, notably by participating in the 2001 invasion of afghanistan and 2003 invasion of iraq. blair is the labour party's longest-serving prime minister, the only person to have led the labour party to three consecutive general election victories, and the only labour prime minister to serve consecutive terms more than one of which was at least four years long.
he was succeeded as leader of the labour party on 24 june 2007 and as prime minister on 27 june 2007 by gordon brown.[5] on the day he resigned as prime minister, he was appointed the official envoy of the quartet on the middle east. in may 2008, blair launched his tony blair faith foundation.[6] this was followed in july 2009 by the launching of the faith and globalisation initiative with yale university in the usa, durham university in the uk and the national university of singapore in asia to deliver a postgraduate programme in partnership with the foundation.[7][8]

simple english wikipedia
anthony charles lyton blair, usually called tony blair, is a former prime minister of the united kingdom. he was born in edinburgh. he was prime minister from may 1997 until june 2007 and was succeeded by the former chancellor of the exchequer, gordon brown.
as leader of the labour party, he won three general elections in the uk, in 1997, 2001 and 2005. he is married to cherie booth. they met on the top deck of a double-decker bus in 1975. cherie claimed "it was a double-decker and we went upstairs. it was completely empty and by the time we got off we knew each other better than when we'd got on. and even better the next morning. he was a very good-looking young man, tall and slim, yet broad in the shoulders. a really strong body."[1]. cherie blair is a lawyer, who graduated from the london school of economics with a first class honours degree. blair himself left oxford university with a second class degree. they have four children, euan, nicky, kathryn, and leo. there was a controversy over blair sending his eldest son euan to a grant-maintained school. as a result of this, alastair campbell discovered blair "standing stark naked reading the daily mail"[2]
he attributes his success in politics to a pair of lucky brogues which he wore for every single prime ministers questions of his leadership. he claimed that "cheap shoes are a false economy".[3]

nlp
