informatics 2a 2017   18

lecture 1

introduction and course administration

john longley
shay cohen

18 september 2017

subject of the course

the o   cial title of the course is:

informatics 2a     processing formal and natural languages

the course is about ways of describing, specifying and processing
both computer languages and human languages.

remarkably, many important ideas and methods are common to
both of sorts     but there are also major di   erences.

lecture 2: overview / roadmap of intellectual content of course.

1

course prerequisites (in practice)

    basic working knowledge of the java programming language

(essential).

    basic knowledge of haskell (recommended but not essential).

    understanding of mathematical notation: sets, functions, re-

lations etc. (seek help if you   re struggling).

2

course sta   

lecturers:
    john longley (jrl@inf.ed.ac.uk)

drop-in time: thurs 10:30   11:30, appleton tower caf  e

    shay cohen (scohen@inf.ed.ac.uk)

drop-in time: tbc

drop-in times held from week 2 onwards.

informatics 2 year organiser:
    rik sarkar (rsarkar@inf.ed.ac.uk)

course secretary:
    kendal reid, ito (ito@inf.ed.ac.uk, appleton tower 6.05)

3

communication mechanisms

course website: http://www.inf.ed.ac.uk/teaching/courses/inf2a/
main anchor point for all course information and material.
bookmark it now!
email list: inf2a-students@inf.ed.ac.uk
important administrative announcements (e.g. changes to dead-
lines) will be posted here.
discussion forum (piazza):
for discussion of course content, lectures, assignments etc.
linked from the course website (main page).
course reps: ug2-reps@inf.ed.ac.uk
for feedback from you to course sta   .

it   s your responsibility to check (especially) your email and the
website and to stay in touch with what   s going on.

4

lectures

    mondays 15:10   16:00, david hume tower hall c

    tuesdays 16:10   17:00, appleton tower theatre 4

(not wednesday as originally advertised!)

    fridays 16:10   17:00, david hume tower hall c

last lecture: tuesday of week 11 (revision lecture).

5

lecture materials

the website contains links to the slides for each lecture.

these links will become live immediately after (or just before)
the lecture takes place.

for those who wish to see the material in advance (e.g., students
with an adjustment schedule), last year   s slides are available via
a link at the top of the page.

if you want printed copies of lecture slides, please print them o   
yourself if you need them, bearing in mind the cost to the planet.
(e.g., use the 4up option.)

6

tutorials

tutorials for inf2a start in week 3 (beginning monday 2 oct).
so tutorial n happens in week n + 2.

each tutorial will cover material from the previous week   s lec-
tures. a tutorial sheet, consisting of problems to be discussed in
tutorial n, will be released (on the course website) by the friday
of week n + 1.

you should have received an email from kendal reid, advertising
the preliminary allocation of students to tutor groups.
if you
can   t make the time of your allocated group, please email kendal
suggesting some groups you could manage. or if you need to
change tutor groups for any other reason, please let kendal know
(important!).

nb. if you miss two tutorials in a row, your pt will be noti   ed
and you may be chased up!

7

python and lab sessions

in parallel with the lecture material, you will be learning the pro-
gramming language (python), and learning to use the associated
natural language toolkit (nltk). these skills will be needed
for the second assessed course assignment.

this can be done with the help of worksheets, available via the
website, which you can work through at the lab session to which
you have been assigned (or a di   erent one, or on your own).

the purposes of the lab sessions are: assistance in learning
python/nltk; assistance with coursework assignments; addi-
tional feedback on assignment 1. lab demonstrators will be on
hand at these sessions to o   er help.

lab sessions start in week 3.

8

assessed coursework

there will be two assessed coursework assignments, carrying
equal weight. each is worth 12.5% of the course mark.

assignment 1: issued by tue 17 oct, due in tue 31 oct, 4pm
assignment 2: issued by fri 17 nov, due in fri 1 dec, 4pm

both assignments will be machine-based, and are to be submit-
ted online from dice machines. assignment 1 is in java and
assignment 2 is in python (using nltk).

marks and feedback on assignments will be available for collec-
tion 2 weeks after the submission deadline.

all assessed work must be your own individual work. see the
school   s guidelines on academic conduct and plagiarism (linked
from course web page).

9

grammar writing exercise (not assessed)

new this year! lecture 24 will be devoted to an in-class exer-
cise. you will work in groups of     3 to write a natural language
grammar and make it generate grammatical sentences.

the grammars will compete with each other on precision (gener-
ating only grammatical sentences) and recall (generating many
sentences). prize for the winning team.

lecture 24 is expected to have a second (optional) hour. but
you   re more than welcome to start working on your grammar
before then. details at

http://www.inf.ed.ac.uk/teaching/courses/inf2a/cgw.html

(linked from course webpage).

10

inf2a exam

main exam in december 2017.
resit in august 2018.

exam dates are set by central administration, not us. we   ll let
you know once they are announced.

the exam is pen-and-paper, and lasts 2 hours. it consists of:

    5 compulsory short questions (10% each), and
    a choice of 2 out of 3 longer questions (25% each).

the total 100% contributes 75% to the course mark.
to pass the course, you must achieve an overall course mark of
40%. (no separate exam or coursework hurdles.)

11

recommended reading

the following textbook is recommended for this course and many
other natural language courses in later years:

    d. jurafsky and j. martin, speech and language processing

(2nd edition), prentice-hall, 2009.

for the formal language side, suitable texts include:

    d. kozen, automata and computability, springer, 2000.
    m. sipser, introduction to the theory of computation (3rd

edition), cengage learning, 2012.

lectures will stick closely to the terminology and notation of the
jurafsky & martin and kozen texts.

12

other resources

    lecture recordings (audio + projector at least) using the

university   s new hopper media capture system.

instructions for replaying the recordings to follow soon. record-
ings should be available immediately after each lecture.

    discussion forum for the course hosted on piazza. follow the
link on the course website to join and get started. use this
for questions and discussion of course material (but obviously
not sharing of solutions). feel free to contribute and help
others!

13

formative feedback

assessed coursework provides you with summative feedback on
the course.

formative feedback is feedback on non-assessed parts of the
course. this helps your understanding and serves as feedforward
towards future assessed components (e.g., the exam). formative
feedback provided in inf2a includes:

    self-assessment and challenge questions in lectures.
    feedback from tutors in tutorials.
    feedback from demonstrators in lab sessions.
    feedback from lecturers at drop-in hours.

14

needing help?

    if you are su   ering from personal circumstances that may be

adversely a   ecting your work, contact your pt.

    if you wish to apply for a coursework deadline extension (for
a good reason!), contact the informatics teaching organiza-
tion, not the lecturers. except in exceptional circumstances,
extensions will only be granted if applied for prior to the
coursework deadline.

    if you are having di   culties understanding the course ma-
terial, possible sources of help are: your class mates, the
discussion forum, your tutor, the lecturers.

    if you wish to anonymously raise any issue about the course

material or delivery, contact ug2-reps@inf.ed.ac.uk

15

enjoy the course!

lecture 2 on thursday: overview and roadmap of the intellec-
tual content of the course (jl+sc).

any questions?

16

