formal modeling in cognitive science 1

lecture 0: course mechanics

frank keller

school of informatics
university of edinburgh
keller@inf.ed.ac.uk

january 6, 2006

course content

this is essentially a maths course, despite the title;

but: mathematical concepts taught from a cognitive science
perspective, motivated with cognitive examples;

emphasis on maths as a tool for understanding cognitive
processes;

emphasis on hand-on learning of mathematical concepts;

computational tools will play an important role throughout
the course.

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

1

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

2

course content

course content

part 1: mathematics for neural and connectionist modeling

part 2: mathematics for behavioral and cognitive modeling

vectors. dimension of visual space. norm, distance.
cluster plot of visual input. inner product.
matrices, simple transformations.
id88. input weighting, digit recognizer, weight matrices.
determinants, inverse, eigenvectors, correlation matrix.
di(cid:11)erentiation, extrema. cost function.
finding minima numerically. learning algorithm.
di(cid:11)erential equations. rate based unit.
oscillators, reaction equations.
numerical integration, stability analysis.
filtering and convolution. spatial temporal (cid:12)lters.
attractors and chaos.
coupled neurons, hop(cid:12)eld network.

introduction to id203 theory. combinatorial methods.
sample spaces, events, probabilities.
id155. bayes    theorem.
applications of bayes    theorem: reasoning, learning.
discrete random variables and distributions.
marginal and conditional distributions. continuous random
variables.
expectation and variance. chebyshev   s theorem.
special distributions. application: eye-movement data.
id203 theory and logic.
id178.
mutual information.
codes. kraft inequality. source coding theorem.
application of id205: discovering structure.

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

3

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

4

target audience

prerequisites

the course is primarily designed for students in year 1 of the
ma in cognitive science;

however, also recommended for students on combined degrees
(ai/psychology, linguistics/ai, mind and language);

also suitable for other informatics students and for external
students;

formally: fmcs1 is a 1st year undergraduate course at level 8,
worth 20 points.

there are no formal prerequisites or co-requisites.

however, it will be advantageous if you attend informatics 1
at the same time.

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

5

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

6

related courses

contact hours

related courses in informatics:

informatics 1a and 1b: some of the logic material from
informatics 1a is useful for fmcs1; some of the corpus
linguistics material from informatics 1b is also useful.

mathematics for informatics 1 and 2: fmcs1 is designed
to be taken instead of mi1 and mi2. this means that there
will be some overlap with these course; however, fmcs1 takes
a di(cid:11)erent perspective (more cognitive, less mathematical).

this course consists of:

3 lectures per week (in weeks 1{10);

1 tutorial per week (in weeks 2{10);

1 two-hour lab session, every other week (in weeks 2{10).

please sign up for tutorials and lab sessions now. state your (cid:12)rst
and second preference on the sign-up sheet.

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

7

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

8

the cast

course infrastructure

lecturers: frank keller (course organizer) and mark van
rossum.

tutor: frank keller.

teaching assistants and lab demonstrators: manuel
marques-pita; gaurav malhotra.

course web site will constantly be updated:
http://www.inf.ed.ac.uk/teaching/courses/fmcs1/;

it lists contact details, time/place, schedules of lectures,
tutorials, labs;

for questions of general interest: please post to newsgroup
eduni.inf.course.fmcs1;

for speci(cid:12)c questions: email tas or course organizer;

announcements regarding the course will be sent to mailing
list fmcs1-students@inf.ed.ac.uk; all students are
subscribed automatically.

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

9

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

10

readings

readings

the main course material are the lecture notes and slides;
these will appear on the course web site;

a reading list with additional readings for each lecture can be
found on the web site;

a reader is available which contains one chapter of each book
(copyright restrictions prevent further photocopying);

all the books on the reading list are in stock in the library in
multiple copies.

greenberg, michael. 1998. advanced engineering
mathematics. 2nd edition. main textbook for part 1.
expensive, but very useful reference.

hertz, j., krogh, a., and palmer, r. g. 1991. introduction to
the theory of neural computation. background on neural
nets for part 1.

miller, irwin and marlys miller. 2004. john e. freund   s
mathematical statistics with applications. main textbook for
part 2.

manning, christopher d. and hinrich schtze. 1999.
foundations of statistical natural language processing.
background on id205. only one chapter needed.

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

11

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

12

assessment

software

the assessment on this course will consist of:

4 assessed assignments, worth 6.25% each (i.e., 25% in total).

a (cid:12)nal exam (120 minutes), worth 75%.

all assignments are due at 16:00 on the due date, and are to be
handed in as hardcopies at the ito. deadlines for assignments are
listed on the course web page.

the assignments include material from the labs and the tutorials,
both practical exercises and mathematical problems.

in the lab sessions, you will learn to solve mathematical and
cognitive problems with matlab;

matlab is a mathematical modeling language;

general background in programming as acquired in
informatics 1 is useful (but not essential);

matlab tutorials can be found on the course web page;

matlab is available on the dice system; if you don   t have an
account yet, apply now through the ito.

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

13

frank keller

formal modeling in cognitive science 1

14

