nlp
natural language processing
semantic similarity
synonyms and paraphrases
example: post-close market announcements
the s&p 500 climbed 6.93, or 0.56 percent, to 1,243.72,        its best close       since june 12, 2001. 

  the nasdaq  gained 12.22, or 0.56 percent, to 2,198.44   for its best showing since june 8, 2001.

      the djia     rose  68.46, or 0.64 percent, to 10,705.55,    its highest level    since march 15.


synonyms
different words (and also word compounds) can have similar meanings. 
tepid and lukewarm have very similar meanings and can be substituted for one another (tepid water vs. lukewarm water).
true synonyms are actually relatively rare. 
even though big and large are often thought of as synonyms, consider the difference between big leagues and large leagues.    
the verbs sweat and perspire are also near synonyms. 
however, they differ in their frequency of use and the type of text in which they are likely to appear.
polysemy
polysemy
polysemy
polysemy is the property of words to have multiple senses.
for example, the noun book can refer to the following:
a literary work (e.g.,    anna karenina   )
a stack of pages (e.g., a notebook)
a record of business transactions (think    bookkeeper   )
a record of bets (think    bookmaker   )
a list of buy and sell orders in a financial market

polysemy
the same word can also have multiple parts of speech, each with its own set of senses. for example, the word book, as a verb can mean    make a reservation for    or    occupy   .
the different senses of the same word don   t have to be equally frequent.
some of the senses may overlap (e.g., the first two senses of book on the previous slide). that   s partially why different dictionaries list different sets of word senses for the same word.
   my favorite books are anna karenina and my father   s checkbook       
some words can be highly polysemous (e.g., the verb    get    has at least 35 different meanings, according to id138).
other semantic relations
antonymy (near opposites) 
raise-lower
hypernymy
a deer is a hypernym for elk
hyponymy (the inverse of hypernymy)
membership meronymy: 
a flock includes sheep (or birds)
part meronymy: 
a table has legs

synsets
semantic relations hold between word senses, not between words.
examples:
the antonym of hot can be either mild or cold (or unattractive) depending on the specific sense of hot.
the immediate hypernym of bar can be one of the following, among others: room, musical notation, obstruction, profession, depending on the sense of bar.
the term synset is used to group together all synonyms of the same word. if a word is polysemous, it may be associated with multiple synsets.
nlp
