what are id165s good for? 

language id 

(see transparencies) 

   (cid:1) useful for search engines, indexers, etc. 
   (cid:1) useful for text-to-speech (how to pronounce 

the name    jan lukasiewicz   ?) 

1 

600.465     intro to nlp     j. eisner 

2 

how to build a language ider? 

text categorization 

   (cid:1) histogram of letters? 
   (cid:1) histogram of bigrams? 
   (cid:1) compare to histograms from known language text 
   (cid:1) but how to aggregate the evidence? 

   (cid:1) could steal techniques from information retrieval 
   (cid:1) treat every language as a huge document and input text 

as a query  

   (cid:1) nicer solution:  

how likely is this text to be generated randomly? 

   (cid:1) automatic yahoo classification, etc. 
   (cid:1) similar to language id     

   (cid:1) topic 1 sample:  in the beginning god created     
   (cid:1) topic 2 sample: the history of all hitherto existing 

society is the history of class struggles.     

   (cid:1) input text: matt   s communist homepage.  capitalism is 

unfair and has been ruining the lives of millions of people 
around the world.  the profits from the workers    labor     

   (cid:1) input text: and they have beat their swords to 

ploughshares, and their spears to pruning-hooks. nation 
doth not lift up sword unto nation, neither do they learn 
war any more.     

600.465     intro to nlp     j. eisner 

3 

600.465     intro to nlp     j. eisner 

4 

topic segmentation 

contextual id147 

   (cid:1) break big document or media stream into 

indexable chunks 

   (cid:1) from npr   s all things considered: 

 the u. n. says its observers will stay in liberia only as long as west 
african peacekeepers do, but west african states are threatening to 
pull out of the force unless liberia   s militia leaders stop violating last 
year   s peace accord after 7 weeks of chaos in the capital, monrovia     
human rights groups cite peace troops as among those smuggling the 
arms.  i   m jennifer ludden, reporting.  whitewater prosecution 
witness david hale began serving a 28-month prison sentence today.  
the arkansas judge and banker pleaded guilty two years ago to 
defrauding the small business administration.  hale was the main 
witness in the whitewater-related trial that led to the convictions     

   (cid:1) which is most probable? 
   (cid:1)     i think they   re okay     
   (cid:1)     i think there okay     
   (cid:1)     i think their okay     

   (cid:1) which is most probable? 

   (cid:1)     by the way, are they   re likely to     
   (cid:1)     by the way, are there likely to     
   (cid:1)     by the way, are their likely to     

600.465     intro to nlp     j. eisner 

5 

600.465     intro to nlp     j. eisner 

6 

id103 

language generation 

listen carefully: what am i saying? 
   (cid:1) how do you recognize speech? 
   (cid:1) how do you wreck a nice beach? 

   (cid:1) put the file in the folder 
   (cid:1) put the file and the folder 

   (cid:1) choose randomly among outputs: 

   (cid:1) visitant which came into the place where it will be japanese has 

admired that there was mount fuji. 

   (cid:1) top 10 outputs according to bigram probabilities: 

   (cid:1) visitors who came in japan admire mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) visitors who came in japan admires mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) visitors who arrived in japan admire mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) visitors who arrived in japan admires mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) visitors who came to japan admire mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) a visitor who came in japan admire mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) the visitor who came in japan admire mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) visitors who came in japan admire mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) the visitor who came in japan admires mount fuji. 
   (cid:1) mount fuji is admired by a visitor who came in japan. 

600.465     intro to nlp     j. eisner 

7 

600.465     intro to nlp     j. eisner 

8 

machine translation 

good english? 
(id165) 

good match 
to french? 

jon appeared in tv. 

appeared on jon tv. 

in jon appeared tv. 

jon is happy today. 

jon appeared on tv. 

tv appeared on jon. 

tv in jon appeared. 

jon was not happy. 

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

600.465     intro to nlp     j. eisner 

9 

