nlp
introduction to nlp
summarization techniques 3/3
conroy and o   leary (2001)
using id48
takes into account the local dependencies between sentences
features
position, number of terms, similarity to document terms
properties
id48 alternates between summary and non-summary states
tuned to extract lead sentences and additional supporting sentences

osborne (2002)
don   t assume feature independence
use maxent (log-linear) models
better than na  ve bayes
features
sentence length
sentence position
inside introduction
inside conclusion
lexrank (erkan and radev 2004)
single and id57
lexical centrality
represent text as graph
graph centrality
graph id91
id93


lexrank
1 (d1s1) iraqi vice president taha yassin ramadan announced today, sunday, that iraq refuses to back down from its decision to stop cooperating with disarmament inspectors before its demands are met.
2 (d2s1) iraqi vice president taha yassin ramadan announced today, thursday, that iraq rejects cooperating with the united nations except on the issue of lifting the blockade imposed upon it since the year 1990.
3 (d2s2) ramadan told reporters in baghdad that "iraq cannot deal positively with whoever represents the security council unless there was a clear stance on the issue of lifting the blockade off of it.
4 (d2s3) baghdad had decided late last october to completely cease cooperating with the inspectors of the united nations special commission (unscom), in charge of disarming iraq's weapons, and whose work became very limited since the fifth of august, and announced it will not resume its cooperation with the commission even if it were subjected to a military operation.
5 (d3s1) the russian foreign minister, igor ivanov, warned today, wednesday against using force against iraq, which will destroy, according to him, seven years of difficult diplomatic work and will complicate the regional situation in the area.
6 (d3s2) ivanov contended that carrying out air strikes against iraq, who refuses to cooperate with the united nations inspectors, ``will end the tremendous work achieved by the international group during the past seven years and will complicate the situation in the region.''
7 (d3s3) nevertheless, ivanov stressed that baghdad must resume working with the special commission in charge of disarming the iraqi weapons of mass destruction (unscom).
8 (d4s1) the special representative of the united nations secretary-general in baghdad, prakash shah, announced today, wednesday, after meeting with the iraqi deputy prime minister tariq aziz, that iraq refuses to back down from its decision to cut off cooperation with the disarmament inspectors.
9 (d5s1) british prime minister tony blair said today, sunday, that the crisis between the international community and iraq ``did not end'' and that britain is still ``ready, prepared, and able to strike iraq.''
10 (d5s2) in a gathering with the press held at the prime minister's office, blair contended that the crisis with iraq ``will not end until iraq has absolutely and unconditionally respected its commitments'' towards the united nations.
11 (d5s3) a spokesman for tony blair had indicated that the british prime minister gave permission to british air force tornado planes stationed in kuwait to join the aerial bombardment against iraq.

lexrank
lexrank
cosine centrality (t=0.3)
cosine centrality (t=0.2)
cosine centrality (t=0.1)
sentences vote for the most central sentence!
cosine centrality (t=0.1)
sentences vote for the most central sentence!

lexrank (advanced material)
square connectivity matrix 
directed vs. undirected
an eigenvalue for a square matrix a is a scalar     such that there exists a vector x   0 such that ax =    x
the normalized eigenvector associated with the largest     is called the principal eigenvector of a
a matrix is called a stochastic matrix when the sum of entries in each row sum to 1 and none is negative. all stochastic matrices have a principal eigenvector
lexrank (advanced material)
the connectivity matrix used in id95 [page & al. 1998] is irreducible [langville & meyer 2003]
an iterative method (power method) can be used to compute the principal eigenvector
that eigenvector corresponds to the stationary value of the markov stochastic process described by the connectivity matrix
this is also equivalent to performing a random walk on the matrix
lexrank (advanced material)
the stationary value of the markov stochastic matrix can be computed using an iterative power method:


id95 adds an extra twist to deal with dead-end pages. with a id203 1-   , a random starting point is chosen. this has a natural interpretation in the case of web page ranking



eigenvector centrality: the paths in the random walk are weighted by the centrality of the nodes that the path connects


su = successor nodes
pr = predecessor nodes
gong and liu (2001)
using latent semantic analysis (lsa)
single and multi-document
not using id138
each document is represented as a word by sentence matrix (row=word, column=sentence)
tf*idf weights in the matrix
svd: a = usvt
the rows of vt are independent topics
select sentences that cover these independent topics
submodular
lin et al. 2009
haghighi and vanderwende
id96
mcdonald 2007
globally optimal search
gillick & favre 2008
integer id135
gous     information geometry

survey generation
nlp
