nlp
introduction to nlp
summarization techniques 1/3
baxendale (1958)
positional method
analysis of 200 paragraphs
pick the first and last sentences of the paragraph
that   s where the topic sentences are located
na  ve but decent approach
luhn (1958)
technical documents
id30
stop words are removed
frequency of content terms
luhn (1958)
sentence-level significance factor
look for concentrations of salient content terms
edmundson (1969)
technical documents
position and frequency
cue words (bonus and stigma words)
significant, hardly, impossible
document structure
is the sentence a title or heading or right under one of these
linear combination of the four features
   1c +    2k +    3t +    4l
frump (dejong 1979, 1982)
knowledge-based
slot-filling based on upi news stories
based on 50 sketchy scripts
inputs matched to scripts based on manually selected keywords
difficult to port to other domains
missing scripts for many inputs


frump
$demonstration script
the demonstrators arrive at the demonstration location.
the demonstrators march.
police arrive on the scene.
the demonstrators communicate with the target of the demonstration.
the demonstrators attack the target of the demonstration.
the demonstrators attack the police.
g. dejong (1979) frump: fast reading understanding and memory program
paice (1990)
survey up to 1990
techniques that (mostly) failed
syntactic criteria (earl 1970)
indicator phrases
problems with extracts
lack of balance
lack of cohesion

paice (1990)
lack of balance
later approaches based on text rhetorical structure
lack of cohesion
anaphoric reference
lexical or definite reference
rhetorical connectives
recognition of anaphors [liddy et al. 87]
example:    that    is
nonanaphoric if preceded by a research-verb (e.g.,    demonstrat-   ),
nonanaphoric if followed by a pronoun, article, quantifier,   ,
external if no later than 10th word,
else
internal
brandow et al. (1995)
anes: commercial news from 41 publications
   lead    achieves acceptability of 90% vs. 74.4% for    intelligent    summaries
20,997 documents
words selected based on tf*idf (term frequency * inverse document frequency)
sentence-based features:
signature words
location
anaphora words
length of abstract
sentences with no signature words are included if between two selected sentences
evaluation done at 60, 150, and 250 word length
non-task-driven evaluation:
   most summaries judged less-than-perfect would not be detectable as such to a user   



kupiec et al. (1995)
first trainable method
20% extract
188 documents from scientific journals
na  ve bayes classifier
new features
sentence length (|s|>5)
presence of uppercase words (except common acronyms)
thematic words
set of 26 manually fixed phrases
sentence position in paragraph
kupiec et al. (1995)
uses na  ve bayes classifier


assuming statistical independence

kupiec et al. (1995)
performance:
for 25% summaries, 84% precision
for smaller summaries, 74% improvement over lead

summons (mckeown & radev 1995)
first work on id57
approach
knowledge-based
information extraction (muc templates)
text generation
summons (mckeown and radev 1995)
nicosia, cyprus (ap)     two bombs exploded near government 
ministries in baghdad, but there was no immediate word of any 
casualties, iraqi dissidents reported friday. there was no independent
confirmation of the claims by the iraqi national congress. iraq   s
state-controlled media have not mentioned any bombings.
summons
summons
summons
reuters reported that 18 people were killed on sunday in a bombing in jerusalem. the next day, a bomb in tel aviv killed at least 10 people and wounded 30 according to israel radio. reuters reported that at least 12 people were killed and 105 wounded in the second incident. later the same day, reuters reported that hamas has claimed responsibility for the act.
summons
if there are two templates
	and
the location is the same
	and
the time of the second template is after the time of the first template
	and
the source of the first template is different from the source of the second template
	and
at least one slot differs
	then
combine the templates using the contradiction operator...
summons
change of perspective
march 4th, reuters reported that a bomb in tel aviv killed at least 10 people and wounded 30. later the same day, reuters reported that exactly 12 people were actually killed and 105 wounded.
precondition:
the same source reports a change in a small number of slots
summons
contradiction
the afternoon of february 26, 1993, reuters reported that a suspected bomb killed at least six people in the world trade center. however, associated press announced that exactly five people were killed in the blast.
precondition:
different sources report contradictory values for a small number of slots
summons
refinement
on monday morning, reuters announced that a suicide bomber killed at least 10 people in tel aviv. in the afternoon, reuters reported that hamas claimed responsibility for the act.
agreement
the morning of march 1st 1994, both upi and reuters reported that a man was kidnapped in the bronx. 
summons
generalization
according to upi, three terrorists were arrested in medell  n last tuesday. reuters announced that the police arrested two drug traffickers in bogot   the next day. 
a total of five criminals were arrested in colombia last week.
mitra/allen/salton
encyclopedia articles
semantic hyperlinks
between pairs of paragraphs with lexical similarity above a threshold
paths linking highly connected paragraphs are more likely to contain information central to the topic of the article
nlp
