nlp
natural language processing
introduction and class logistics
quiz
where is this quote from?
dave bowman: open the pod bay doors, hal.
hal: i   m sorry dave. i   m afraid i can   t do that.
quiz answer
   2001: a space odyssey    
1968 film by stanley kubrick 
based on a joint screenplay with arthur c. clarke.

watson example
http://www.geekwire.com/2013/ibm-takes-watson-cloud/ 
what is natural language processing
natural language processing (nlp) 
it is the study of the computational treatment of natural (human) language.
in other words, teaching computers how to understand (and generate) human language.

modern applications
search engines
google, yahoo, bing, baidu
id53
ibm   s watson
natural language assistants
apple   s siri, ms cortana
translation systems
google translate
news digest
yahoo!
automated earthquake reports
la times
automated stock market reports
narrative science


notes
computers are confused by (human) language
specific techniques are needed
nlp draws on research in many fields
linguistics, theoretical computer science, mathematics, statistics, artificial intelligence, psychology, databases, etc.
cpsc 477/577
instructor:
dragomir radev
dragomir.radev@yale.edu
class times:
tth 1-2:15
loria building
tf/ula:
corina grigore, rui zhang
elaine hou, will merrill, soumya kambhampati, eren orbey
others tba
nlp
textbook: 
speech and language processing
by jurafsky and martin
second edition, 2009
http://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/ 
additional readings:
natural language processing using nltk (bird et al.) 
http://www.nltk.org  

other available books
foundations of statistical natural language processing
chris manning and hinrich sch  tze
http://nlp.stanford.edu/fsnlp/ 
natural language understanding
james allen (older book)
course dates
jan
16 18 23 25 30
feb
1 6 8 13 15 20 22 27
mar
1 6 8 27 29
apr
3 5 10 12 17 19 24 26
exams
midterm exam around march 9 (date tba)
final exam scheduled may 8 at 2 pm
structure of the course
linguistic, mathematical, and computational background
computational models of morphology, syntax, semantics, discourse, pragmatics
core nlp technology: parsing, id52, text generation, semantic analysis, etc.
applications: text classification, id31, text summarization, id53, machine translation, information extraction, etc.
neural networks and deep learning: autoencoders, recurrent nn, lstm, etc.
major goals of the class
learn the basic principles and theoretical issues underlying natural language processing 
understand why language processing is hard
learn techniques and tools used to develop practical, robust systems that can understand text and communicate with users in one or more languages 
understand the limitations of these techniques and tools
gain insight into some open research problems in natural language processing
syllabus
book sections (as of the second edition)
introduction (chapter 1)
words (chapters 2-6)
syntax (chapters 12-16)
semantics and pragmatics (chapters 17-21)
applications (chapters 22-25)
draft syllabus
relevant background
id202
vectors and matrices
probabilities
random variables
discrete and continuous distributions
bayes    theorem
programming
python in a unix environment.
text manipulation
background links
id127
https://www.intmath.com/matrices-determinants/matrix-multiplication-examples.php 
id47
https://betterexplained.com/articles/an-intuitive-and-short-explanation-of-bayes-theorem/ 
derivative of the sigmoid function
https://beckernick.github.io/sigmoid-derivative-neural-network/   

grading
assignments (50%)
hw0+hw1 = 2+8=10%
hw2 = 10%
hw3 = 10%
hw4 = 10%
hw5 = 10%
exams (45%)
midterm = 20%
final exam = 25%
class participation (5%)
in-class participation, asking questions on piazza, answering question on piazza, office hours


sample programming assignments
id38 and id52
id33
vector semantics and id51
id53
deep learning 
machine translation
id31
natural language interface to a database
id29

how to get the most out of the class?
attend the lectures and study the slides
course syllabus + slides = road map 
some material may not be found in any of the readings
hands on experience
implement what you   ve learned 
ask questions in and after class
questions?
use the right channel for communication
piazza
in special cases (e.g., sickness, regrading), use email
include [cpsc477] or [cpsc577] or [nlp class] in the subject line
office hours: 
tba
courses at other places
brick-and-mortar
johns hopkins (jason eisner)
cornell (lillian lee)
stanford (chris manning, dan jurafsky, richard socher, chris potts)
maryland (hal daum  )
berkeley (dan klein)
texas (ray mooney)
harvard (sasha rush)
illinois (julia hockenmaier)
coursera
manning/jurafsky (2012, survey)
michael collins (2013, more advanced)
radev (2015-2016, survey)
the association for computational linguistics (acl)
the alphabet soup
nlp (natural language processing)
cl (computational linguistics)
ir (information retrieval)
sp (speech processing)
hlt (human language technology)
nle (natural language engineering)
ml (machine learning)

research in nlp
conferences: 
acl, naacl, emnlp, sigir, aaai/ijcai, coling, hlt, eacl, amta/mt summit, icslp, interspeech, nips, iclr
journals: 
computational linguistics, tacl, natural language engineering, information retrieval, information processing and management, acm transactions on information systems, acm talip, acm tslp
university centers: 
berkeley, columbia, stanford, cmu, jhu, brown, umass, mit, upenn, usc/isi, illinois, michigan, yale, washington, maryland, nyu, etc.
toronto, edinburgh, cambridge, sheffield, saarland, trento, prague, qcri, nus, and many others
industrial research sites: 
google, facebook, msr, yahoo, ibm, sri, bbn, mitre, baidu, salesforce
the acl anthology
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology
the acl anthology network (aan)
http://tangra.cs.yale.edu/newaan   
lily projects
text summarization
crosslingual information retrieval
deep learning
citation analysis
survey generation
collective discourse
id141
dialogue systems
multilingual computing
academic honesty
unless otherwise specified in an assignment all submitted work must be your own, original work. any excerpts, statements, or phrases from the work of others must be clearly identified as a quotation, and a proper citation provided. 
any violation of the university   s policy on academic and professional integrity will result in serious penalties, which might range from failing an assignment, to failing a course, to being expelled from the program. 
violations of academic and professional integrity will be reported to student affairs. consequences impacting assignment or course grades are determined by the faculty instructor; additional sanctions may be imposed.
student mental health and wellbeing
yale university is committed to advancing the mental health and wellbeing of its students. 
if you or someone you know is feeling overwhelmed, depressed, and/or in need of support, services are available. 

students with disabilities
if you think you need an accommodation for a disability, please let me know at your earliest convenience. 
some aspects of this course, the assignments, the in-class activities, and the way we teach may be modified to facilitate your participation and progress. 
i will treat any information that you provide in as confidential a manner as possible. 
nlp
